COMPENDIUM 
OF 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA SCHEMES AND 
PROGRAMMES RELEVANT TO THE 
NORTH EASTERN STATES 

 

 

 

 

Compiled by: 
NERCORMP 
NORTH EASTERN REGION COMMUNITY RESOURCE 
MANAGEMENT PROJECT 
SHILLONG - 793 003 

November 2020

1 CONTENTS 

 
Name of Schemes Page No. 

1. Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
1.1 Minimum Support Price Scheme 10 
1.2 Marketing research and information network (under Integrated Scheme for 
Agricultural Marketing -ISAM) 11 
1.3 Central Herd Registration Scheme 12 
1.4 National Food Security Mission 13 
1.5 Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana Remunerative Approaches for Agriculture 
and Allied sector Rejuvenation (RKVY -RAFTAAR) 15 
1.6 National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) 16 
1.7 National Innovations on Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) 20 
1.8 Integrated Scheme for Agricultural Marketing (ISAM) 22 
1.9 Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH) 24 
1.10 Sub-Mission on Agricultural Mechanization 26 
1.11 Sub-Mission on Agroforestry (SMAF) under NMSA 28 
1.12 Rainfed Area Development Programme (RADP) 30 
1.13 Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) 32 
1.14 Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) 34 
1.15 Sankalp Se Siddhi 38

2 1.16 Gramin Agricultural Markets (GrAMs) 39 

2. Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
2.1 Assistance to Fodder Block Making Units 41 
2.2 Fodder Seed Procurement and Distribution 42 
2.3 Assistance for Introduction of Hand Driven Chaff Cutter 43 
2.4 Assistance for Establishment of Area Specific Mineral Mixture / Feed 
Pelleting / Feed Manufacturing Unit 43 
2.5 National Livestock Mission (NLM) 44 

3. Ministry of Commerce and Industry 
3.1 Export Promotion Capital Goods (EPCG) 47 
3.2 Geographical Indications Registry 48 
3.3 National Programme for Organic Production (NPOP) 50 
3.4 Focus Product Scheme (FPS) 52 
3.5 Marketing Development Assistance (MDA) Scheme 52 

4. Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution 
4.1 Price Stabilization Fund (PSF) 57 

5. Ministry of Culture 
5.1 Centre for Cultural Resources and Training (CCRT) 59

3 5.2 National Culture Fund (NCF) 60 
5.3 Guru Shishya Parampara Scheme 62 
5.4 Young Talented Artistes Scheme 63 
5.5 Cultural Function and Production Grant Scheme (CFPGS) 64 
5.6 Seva Bhoj Yojna 65 

6. Ministry for Development of North Eastern Region 
6.1 North East Special Infrastructure Development Schemes (NESIDS) 68 

6.2. North Eastern Council 
6.2.1 Schemes of the North Eastern Council 69 
6.2.2 Guidelines for selecting proposals under head for Promotion of 
North Eastern Region [para 2.6 (viii) of NEC General Guidelines 
2020] 70 
6.2.3 North East Road Sector Development Scheme (NERSDS) 74 

6.2.4 Financial Support to the Students of N.E.R for Higher Professional 
Courses 75 

7. Ministry of Jal Shakti 
7.1 Nirmal Gram Puraskar (NGP) 78 
7.2 Swachh Bharat Mission Gramin 80 
7.3 Swajal 82 
7.4 Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) 83

4 
8. Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
8.1 National Afforestation Programme 85 

9. Ministry of Finance 
9.1 National Pension System (NPS) 88 
9.2 Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY) 90 
9.3 Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana (PMJJBY) 91 
9.4 Pradhan Mantri Suraksha BimaYojana (PMSBY) 93 
9.5 Atal Pension Yojana (APY) 94 

10. Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
10.1 Mega Food Park 96 
10.2 Promotional Activities through National /International Exhibitions/ Fairs 
and Studies/Surveys, Workshops, Seminars 99 
10.3 Revised Operational Guidelines of the Scheme for Integrated Cold Chain 
and Value Addition Infrastructure 104 
10.4 Pradhan Mantri Kisan SAMPADA Yojana (Scheme for Agro -Marine 
Processing and Development of Agro -Processing Clusters) 107 

11. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
11.1 National Iodine Deficiency Disorders Control Programme (NIDDCP) 118 
11.2 National Mental Health Program (NMHP) 120 
11.3 National Leprosy Eradication Programme (NLEP) 126

5 11.4 Universal Immunisation Programme 128 
11.5 National Vector Borne Diseases Control Programme 132 
11.6 Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme (IDSP) 135 
11.7 Janani Suraksha Yojana (JSY) 137 
11.8 National Programme for Prevention and Control of Deafness (NPPCD) 139 
11.9 Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY) 142 
11.10 National Programme for Prevention and Control of Cancer, Diabetes, 
Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke (NPCDCS) 143 
11.11 National Programme for Health Care of the Elderly (NPHCE) 145 
11.12 Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakram (JSSK) 148 
11.13 National Health Mission (NHM) 150 
11.14 Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram (RBSK) 152 
11.15 Home Based Newborn Care (HBNC) 155 
11.16 National Urban Health Mission (NUHM) 157 
11.17 Revised National TB Control Programme (RNTCP) 158 

12. Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
12.1 Lumpsum Provision scheme for the benefit of NER Including Sikkim 165 
12.2 Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana -National Urban Livelihoods Mission 166 
12.3 Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana 168

6 
13. Ministry of Human Resource Development 
13.1 Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan (RUSA) 170 
13.2 Samagra Shiksha 172 

14. Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
14.1 International Cooperation (IC) 175 
14.2 Prime Minister‟s Employment Generation Programme (PMEGP) 179 
14.3 Marketing Assistance Scheme 182 
14.4 Entrepreneurship and Skill Development Programme 183 
14.5 Coir Vikas Yojana (CVY) 184 

14.6 Khadi and Village Industries Commission 
14.6.1 Pottery making activity under "Village Industry Development Scheme 
(GVY)" scheme 190 
14.6.2 Beekeeping activity under "Village Industry Development Scheme (GVY)" 
scheme 191 
14.6.3 Agarbati making project "Village Industry Development Scheme (GVY)" 
scheme 193 

15. Ministry of Minority Affairs 
15.1 The Maulana Azad Education Foundation (MAEF) 195 
15.2 Seekho aur Kamao (Learn & Earn) 199 

16. Ministry of New and Renewable Energy

7 16.1 Grid Connected Rooftop and Small Solar Power Plants Programme 201 

17. Ministry of Rural Development 
17.1 National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP) 203 
17.2 Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) 204 
17.3 Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) 205 
17.4 Deendayal Antayodaya Yojana - National Rural Livelihoods Mission 
(NRLM) 208 
17.5 Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU -GKY) 209 
17.6 Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana – Gramin (PMAY -G) 211 
17.7 Shyama Prasad Mukherji Rurban Mission (SPMRM) 212 

18. Ministry of Textiles 
18.1 Cluster Development Project of Handloom in NER under North East 
Textiles Promotion Scheme 214 
18.2 Technological Upgradation of Handlooms in NER 218 
18.3 Market promotion of North Eastern Textiles & Handloom products under 
NER Textile promotion scheme (NERTPS) 220 
18.4 Amended Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme 231 
18.5 Schemes of the National Handicraft Development Programme for 
development and promotion of Handicrafts Sector 233 

19. Ministry of Tourism

8 19.1 Entrepreneurship Programme 267 
19.2 Adopt a Heritage „Apni Dharohar, Apni Pehchaan‟ 269 

20. Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
20.1 Scheme of Strengthening Education among Scheduled Tribe (ST) Girls in 
Low Literacy Districts 272 
20.2 Scheme of Grant -In-Aid to Voluntary Organisations Working For the 
Welfare of Scheduled Tribes 275 
20.3 Vocational Training in Tribal Areas 278 
20.4 Special Central Assistance (SCA) to Tribal Sub Scheme (TSS) 280 

21. Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation 
21.1 Flood Management Programme 282 

22. Ministry of Women and Child Development 
22.1 Working Women Hostel 284 
22.2 Support to Training and Employment Programme for Women (STEP) 287 
22.3 Ujjawala 292 
22.4 Nirbhaya Fund 294 
22.5 Pradhan Mantri Matritva Vandana Yojana (PMMVY) 297 
22.6 General Grant -in-aid (GIA) Scheme for Assistance to Voluntary 
Organisations in the field of Women and Child Development 298

9 22.7 Beti Bachao Beti Padhao (BBBP) 300 
22.8 Swadhar Greh 301 

23. Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports 
23.1 National Service Scheme (NSS) 303 
23.2 National Youth Development Fund 306 
23.3 National Programme for Youth and Adolescent Development 308

10 Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
1.1 Name of Scheme: Minimum Support Price Scheme 
Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 
The Minimum Support Prices were announced by the Government of India for the first time in 
1966 -67 for Wheat in the wake of the Green Revolution and extended harvest, to save the 
farmers from depleting profits. Since then, the MSP regime has been expanded to many crops. 
Minimum Support Price is the price at which government purchases crops from the farmers, 
whatever may be the price for the crops. The MSP is announced by the Government of India 
for 26 crops currently at the beginning of each season viz. Rabi and Kharif. They are as follows. 

• Cereals (7) - paddy, wheat, barley, jowar, bajra, maize and ragi 
• Pulses (5) - gram, arhar/tur, moong, urad and lentil 
• Oilseeds (8) - groundnut, rapeseed/mustard, toria, soyabean, sunflower seed, sesamum, 
safflower seed and nigerseed 
• Copra 
• De-husked coconut 
• Raw cotton 
• Raw jute 
• Sugarcane (Fair and remunerative price) 
• Virginia flu cured (VFC) tobacco 

Objectives: 

The minimum support prices are a guarantee price for their produce from the Government. The 
major objectives are to support the farmers from distress sales and to procure food grains for 
public distribution. In case the market price for the commodity falls below the announced 
minimum price due to bumper production and glut in the market, government agencies purchase 
the entire quantity offered by the farmers at the announced minimum price. 

Salient features : 

If there is a fall in the prices of the crops, after a bumper harvest, the government purchases at 
the MSP and this is the reason that the priced cannot go below MSP. So this directly helps the 
farmers. 

The government decided the support prices for various agricultural commodities after taking into 
account the following: 

• Recommendations of Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices

11 • Views of State Governments 

• Views of Ministries 

• Other relevant factors. 

Funding Pattern: 

MSP is price fixed by Government of India to protect the farmers against excessive fall in price 
during bumper production years. The minimum support prices are a guarantee price for their 
produce from the Government. The MSP is calculated and recommended by the CACP. For the 
calculation of the MSP, the CACP takes into account a comprehensive view of the entire 
structure of the economy of a particular commodity or group of commodities. Other Factors 
include cost of production, changes in input prices, input -output price parity, trends in market 
prices, demand and supply, inter -crop price parity, effect on industrial cost structure, effect on 
cost of living, effect on general price level, international price situation, parity between prices 
paid and prices received by the farmers and effect on issue prices and implications for subsidy. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories. 

For detail Information visit: http://www.agricoop.nic.in/recentinitiatives/minimum -support - 
prices -msp-and-bonus -kharif -crops -2017 -18-season 

 
1.2 Name of Scheme: Marketing research and information network (under Integrated 
Scheme for Agricultural Marketing -ISAM) 
Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 

From 2000 -01, the government is working to establish a nationwide information network by 
providing electronic connectivity to important agricultural marketing boards and directorates. It 
will also collect and disseminate price and market -related data for its efficient and timely 
utilisation by producers, traders and consumers to derive maximum the advantage of their sales 
and purchases; increase marketing efficiency by effective improvement in the existing market 
information system; and sensitise and orient to the farmers‟ response to new challenges in 
agricultural marketing by using Information Technology as a vehicle for the extension. 

Year of Commencement: 2000 -01 

Objectives: 

• To establish a nation -wide information network for speedy collection and dissemination 
of market information and data for its efficient and timely utilization.

12 • To facilitate collection and dissemination of information related to better price realization 
and market access by the farmers. 

Salient features : 

NIC has created a user friendly software package / portal to facilitate organization and 
transmission of market data which is called AGMARKNET. 

Support for: Supply of computers & other peripherals, & IT instruments; training of market 
personnel in handling of hardware and software & incentivizing them in monetary terms to 
upload data. 
Eligibility : 

Direct: The State Agricultural Marketing Boards/Directorates/NIC (National informatics centre), 
National and state level institutions. 

Indirect: Farmers, agricultural marketing functionaries and marketing personnel at grass -root 
levels are eligible under this scheme. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: http://agricoop.gov.in/sites/default/files/finalopguidelines.pdf 

 

1.3 Name of Scheme: Central Herd Registration Scheme 

Central Herd Registration Scheme is for registration of elite cow and buffalo breeds of national 
importance and provides incentive for rearing of elite cows and male calves. It plays a vital role 
in sourcing indigenous germplasm required for the National Project for Cattle and Buffalo 
Breeding. The scheme has a significant role in assisting the Department of Animal Husbandry of 
States and Union Territories, Private Sector and Government Undertakings in procuring elite 
dairy cows and buffaloes as well as bulls and progeny of high genetic potential for use in the 
development programme. 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2001 -02 
Objectives: 
i. To survey and study production records of cows and buffaloes in their breeding tracts.

13 ii. Cataloguing of superior germplasm of the selected breeds in their breeding tracts as well as 
breeding farms through milk recording and registration. 

iii. To disseminate information on registered animals for sourcing of breeding material and inter - 
farm and inter-breeder exchange of animals. 

iv. To promote conservation of selected indigenous breeds by providing incentives to breeders. 

v. To regulate sale/purchase of elite animals to ensure and enforce quality control for further 
propagation of breeding. 

vi. To propagate and awaken consciousness amongst the breeders to improve their economics 
through livestock improvement by constant publicity, incentive and formation of breeder 
associations. 

Salient features: 

The Central Herd Registration Scheme is continuing with four Units located at Rohtak 
(Haryana), Ajmer (Rajasthan), Ahmedabad (Gujarat) and Ongole (Andhra Pradesh). These four 
units together cover the States of Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Delhi, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Maharashtra 
and Andhra Pradesh. The cattle breeds of Hariana, Gir, Kankrej and Ongole and buffalo breeds 
of Murrah, Surti, Mehsana and Jaffrabadi are registered under the Scheme depending on the 
confirmation to breed characteristics and prescribed milk production norm. Owners of registered 
animals are provided certificate and prizes/incentives to encourage conservation of indigenous 
breeds and production of high quality cows and buffaloes. 

Eligibility: Owners of the elite animals. 

The primary aim is to identify elite germ plasm for further improvement in milk production. 
Indigenous breeds covered at present are Gir, Kankrej, Hariana, Ongole of cattle and Murrah, 
Jaffrabadi, Surti and Mehsani of buffaloes. Under the scheme incentives for rearing of elite 
cows, buffaloes and their male calves is given to the owners of the elite animals. 

For detail Information visit: http://www.dahd.nic.in/related -links/central -herd -registration - 
scheme -0 

 
1.4 Name of Scheme: National Food Security Mission 

In view of the stagnating food grain production and an increasing consumption need of the 
growing population, Government of India has launched this Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme, „National Food Security Mission‟ in October 2007.

14 The Mission is being continued during 12th Five Year Plan with new targets of additional 
production of food grains of 25 million tons of food grains comprising of 10 million tons rice, 8 
million tons of wheat, 4 million tons of pulses and 3 million tons of coarse cereals by the end of 
12th Five Year Plan. 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 

Objectives: 

The following are the objectives of this scheme: 

• Increasing production of rice and pulses through area expansion and productivity 
enhancement in a sustainable manner in the identified districts of the state. 
• Restoring soil fertility and productivity at the individual farm level. 
• Creation of employment opportunities and 
• Enhancing farm level economy i.e. farm profits to restore confidence amongst the 
farmers. 

Salient features : 

i. Implementation of programmes in a mission mode through active engagement of all the 
stakeholders at various levels. 

ii. Promotion and extension of improved technologies i.e., seed, Integrated Nutrient Management 
including micronutrients, soil amendments, IPM and resource conservation technologies along 
with capacity building of farmers. 

iii. Flow of fund would be closely monitored to ensure that interventions reach the target 
beneficiaries on time. 

iv. The proposed interventions would be integrated with the District Plan and fixed targets for 
each identified district. 

v. Constant monitoring and concurrent evaluation for assessing the impact of the interventions 
for a result oriented approach by the implementing agencies. 

Structure of Scheme: 

The NFSM has three components (i) National Food Security Mission - Rice (NFSM -Rice); (ii) 
National Food Security Mission - Wheat (NFSM -Wheat); and National Food Security Mission - 
Pulses (NFSM Pulses). 

The Mission is mandated to adopt following strategies:

15 ▪ Speedy implementation of programmes through active engagement of all the 
stakeholders at various levels. 

▪ Promotion and extension of improved technologies i.e., seed, Integrated Nutrient 
Management including micronutrients (like iron, cobalt, copper etc), soil 
amendments, Integrated Pest Management (IPM) and resource conservation 
technologies along with capacity building of farmers. 

▪ Flow of fund would be closely monitored to ensure that interventions reach the target 
beneficiaries on time. 

▪ The proposed interventions would be integrated with the targets fixed for each 
identified district in the existing District Plan (formulated as a part of national Five 
Year Plans). 

▪ Constant monitoring and concurrent evaluation for assessing the impact of the 
interventions for a result oriented approach by the implementing agencies. 

Funding Pattern : As per detailed in the guidelines. 

Eligibility : Farmers and their dependents are eligible for this scheme. 

Area of Operation: 

NFSM -Rice, NFSM -Wheat, NFSM -Pulses and NFSM -Coarse Cereals will be implemented in 
199, 119, 557 and 182 identified districts of different States, respectively (Details in link below). 

For detail Information visit: https://nfsm.gov.in/Guidelines/NFSM12102018.pdf 

 

 
1.5 Name of Scheme: Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana - Remunerative Approaches for 
Agriculture and Allied sector Rejuvenation (RKVY -RAFTAAR) 
A major cause for the slow growth in agriculture during the last few decades in India is said to be 
lack of adequate investment in agriculture especially public investment. Hence, the National 
Development Council has ratified a major scheme to raise investment in the sector at the same 
time by considering the agro climatic conditions and other aspects prevailing at the state and 
district levels. Given these problems and prospects in agriculture, the NDC has launched the 
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) in 2007 -2008.

16 Based on feedback received from States, experiences garnered during implementation in the 12th 
Plan and inputs provided by stakeholders, RKVY guidelines have been revamped as RKVY – 
RAFTAAR - Remunerative Approaches for Agriculture and Allied sector Rejuvenation to 
enhance efficiency, efficacy and inclusiveness of the programme for the remaining period of the 
Fourteenth Finance Commission . 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2007 -08 
Objectives: 
The main objectives of the scheme are- (i) To strengthen the farmers‟ efforts through creation of 
required pre and postharvest agri -infrastructure that increases access to quality inputs, storage, 
market facilities etc. and enables farmers to make informed choices. (ii) To provide autonomy, 
flexibility to States to plan and execute schemes as per local/ farmers‟ needs. (iii) To promote 
value chain addition linked production models that will help farmers increase their income as 
well as encourage production/productivity (iv) To mitigate risk of farmers with focus on 
additional income generation activities - like integrated farming, mushroom cultivation, bee 
keeping, aromatic plant cultivation, floriculture etc. (v) To attend national priorities through 
several sub-schemes. (vi) To empower youth through skill development, innovation and 
agrientrepreneurship based agribusiness models that attract them to agriculture. 

Funding Pattern: The ratio of 60:40 between Centre and States (90:10 for North Eastern States 
and Himalayan States). For Union Territories the funding pattern is 100 % central grant. 

Eligibility: Individual, Family, Community, Women. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories. 

For detail Information visit: 
http://rkvy.nic.in/static/download/pdf/RKVY_14th_Fin._Comm.pdf 

 

 
1.6 Name of Scheme: National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) 

National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) has been formulated for enhancing 
agricultural productivity especially in rainfed areas focusing on integrated farming, water use 
efficiency, soil health management and synergizing resource conservation. NMSA architecture 
has been designed by converging, consolidating and subsuming all ongoing as well as newly 
proposed activities/programmes related to sustainable agriculture with a special emphasis on soil

17 & water conservation, water use efficiency, soil health management and rainfed area 
development. The focus of NMSA will be to infuse the judicious utilization of resources of 
commons through community based approach. 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2010 
Objectives: 
1. To make agriculture more productive, sustainable, remunerative and climate resilient by 
promoting location specific Integrated/Composite Farming Systems; 
2. To conserve natural resources through appropriate soil and moisture conservation measures; 

3. To adopt comprehensive soil health management practices based on soil fertility maps, soil test 
based application of macro & micro nutrients, judicious use of fertilizers etc.; 

4. To optimize utilization of water resources through efficient water management to expand 
coverage for achieving „more crop per drop‟ ; 

5. To develop capacity of farmers & stakeholders, in conjunction with other on - going Missions 
e.g. National Mission on Agriculture Extension & Technology, National Food Security Mission, 
National Initiative for Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) etc., in the domain of climate 
change adaptation and mitigation measures; 

6. To pilot models in select blocks for improving productivity of rainfed farming by mainstreaming 
rainfed technologies refined through NICRA and by leveraging resources from other 
schemes/Missions like Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme 
(MGNREGS), Integrated Watershed Management Programme (IWMP), RKVY etc.; and 

7. To establish an effective inter and intra Departmental/Ministerial co - ordination for 
accomplishing key deliverables of National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture under the aegis 
of National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC). 

Salient features: 

• Promoting integrated farming system covering crops, livestock & fishery, plantation and 
pasture based composite farming for enhancing livelihood opportunities, ensuring food 
security and minimizing risks from crop failure through supplementary/ residual 
production systems; 
• Popularizing resource conservation technologies (both on - farm and off - farm) and 
introducing practices that will support mitigation efforts in times of extreme climatic 
events or disasters like prolonged dry spells, floods etc.

18 • Promoting effective management of available water resources and enhancing water use 
efficiency through application of technologies coupled with demand and supply side 
management solutions; 
• Encouraging improved agronomic practices for higher farm productivity, improved soil 
treatment, increased water holding capacity, judicious use of chemicals/ energy and 
enhanced soil carbon storage; 
• Creating database on soil resources through land use survey, soil profile study and soil 
analysis on GIS platform to facilitate adoption of location and soil - specific crop 
management practices & optimize fertilizer use; 
• Promoting location and crop specific integrated nutrient management practices for 
improving soil health, enhancing crop productivity and maintaining quality of land and 
water resources; 
• Involving knowledge institutions and professionals in developing climate change 
adaptation and mitigation strategies for specific agro climatic situations and promoting 
them through appropriate farming systems 
• Programmatic interventions as per land capability and conducive to climatic parameters 
in select blocks as pilots for ensuring integrated development through dissemination and 
adoption of rainfed technologies with greater reach in disadvantaged areas & location 
specific planning by way of coordination, convergence and leveraging investments from 
other Schemes/Missions like MGNREGS, IWMP, RKVY, National Food Security 
Mission (NFSM), Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH), National 
Mission for Agricultural Extension & Technology (NMAE&T) etc. 
Structure of Scheme: 

NMSA has following four (4) major programme components or activities: 

Rainfed Area Development (RAD) 

RAD adopts an area based approach for development and conservation of natural resources 
along with farming systems. This component has been formulated in a „watershed plus 
framework‟, i.e., to explore potential utilization of natural resources base/assets available/created 
through watershed development and soil conservation activities /interventions under 
MGNREGS, NWDPRA, RVP&FPR, RKVY, IWMP etc.. This component introduces 
appropriate farming systems by integrating multiple components of agriculture such as crops, 
horticulture, livestock, fishery, forestry with agro based income generating activities and value 
addition. Besides, soil test/soil health card based nutrient management practices, farmland 
development, resource conservation and crop selection conducive to local agro climatic 
condition are also promoted under this component. A cluster based approach of 100 hectare or 
more (contiguous or non contiguous in difficult terrain with close proximity in a 
village/adjoining villages) may be adopted to derive noticeable impact of convergence and

19 encourage local participation and for future replication of the model in larger areas. 
Supplementary support from this component will be admissible for gap - filling resource 
conservation activities under converging programmes. RAD clusters should have soil 
analysis/soil health card /soil survey maps to justify the interventions proposed and at least 25% 
of the farming system area will have to be covered under On Farm Water Management. Farming 
Systems recommended by ICAR‟s Contingency Plans and successful findings of NICRA 
projects shall also be considered in development of integrated project plan. Besides, creation and 
development of common property resources/assets/utilities like grain bank, biomass shredders, 
fodder bank, group marketing etc. will be encouraged under this component. 

On Farm Water Management (OFWM) 

OFWM focuses primarily on enhancing water use efficiency by promoting efficient on - farm 
water management technologies and equipment. This not only focuses on application efficiency 
but, in conjunction with RAD component, also will emphasize on effective harvesting & 
management of rainwater. Assistance will be extended for adopting water conservation 
technologies, efficient delivery and distribution systems etc. Emphasis will also be given to 
manage and equitably distribute the resources of commons by involving the water users 
associations, etc.. To conserve water on farm itself, farm ponds may be dug using MGNREGA 
funds and earth moving machinery (to the extent manual digging under MGNREGA is not 
feasible) 

Soil Health Management (SHM) 

SHM aims at promoting location as well as crop specific sustainable soil health management 
including residue management, organic farming practices by way of creating and linking soil 
fertility maps with macro - micro nutrient management, appropriate land use based on land 
capability, judicious application of fertilizers and minimizing the soil erosion/degradation. 
Assistance will be provided for various improved package of practices based on land use and soil 
characteristics, generated through geographical information system (GIS) based thematic maps 
and database on land and soil characteristics through extensive field level scientific surveys. 
Besides, this component will also provide support to reclamation of problem soils 
(acid/alkaline/saline). This component will be implemented by State Govt., National Centre of 
Organic Farming (NCOF), Central Fertilizer Quality Control & Training Institute (CFQC&TI) 
and Soil and Land Use Survey of India (SLUSI). 

Climate Change and Sustainable Agriculture: Monitoring, Modeling and Networking 
(CCSAMMN) 
CCSAMMN provides creation and bidirectional (land/farmers to research/scientific 
establishments and vice versa) dissemination of climate change related information and 
knowledge by way of piloting climate change adaptation/mitigation research/model projects in

20 the domain of climate smart sustainable management practices and integrated farming system 
suitable to local agro - climatic conditions. Comprehensive pilot blocks will be supported to 
illustrate functional mechanism for dissemination of rainfed technologies, planning, convergence 
and coordination with flagship schemes/Missions like MGNREGS, IWMP, Accelerated 
Irrigation Benefit Programme (AIBP), RKVY, NFSM, NHM, NMAET etc. Such an integrated 
action of input and output flows across agriculture, livestock and other production systems will 
harness the growth potential of the rainfed production systems, imparting sustainability of local 
production systems while negotiating climate change risks. 

Funding Pattern: Funding pattern under centrally sponsored scheme with sharing between 
centre and state in the ratio of 90:10 for 8(eight) North East State and 3 (three) hilly states, 100% 
financial assistance for UTs and 60:40 for the remaining states as per operational guidelines. 

Eligibility: All Farmers 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories. 

For detail Information visit: 
http://agricoop.gov.in/sites/default/files/NMSA_Guidelines_English.pdf 

 

 
1.7 Name of Scheme: National Innovations on Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) 

National Innovations on Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) is a network project of the 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR). The project aims to enhance resilience of 
Indian agriculture to climate change and climate vulnerability through strategic research and 
technology demonstration. The research on adaptation and mitigation covers crops, livestock, 
fisheries and natural resource management. The project consists of four components viz. 
Strategic Research, Technology Demonstration, Capacity Building and Sponsored/Competitive 
Grants. 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2010 -11 
Objectives of the scheme: 
Climate change has become an important area of concern for India to ensure food and nutritional 
security for growing population. The impacts of climate change are global, but countries like 
India are more vulnerable in view of the high population depending on agriculture. In India, 
significant negative impacts have been implied with medium -term (2010 -2039) climate change,

21 predicted to reduce yields by 4.5 to 9 percent, depending on the magnitude and distribution of 
warming. Since agriculture makes up roughly 16 percent of India‟s GDP, a 4.5 to 9% negative 
impact on production implies a cost of climate change to be roughly up to 1.5 percent of GDP 
per year. The Government of India has accorded high priority on research and development to 
cope with climate change in agriculture sector. The Prime Minister‟s National Action Plan on 
climate change has identified Agriculture as one of the eight national missions. 

With this background, the ICAR has launched a major Project entitled, National Initiative on 
Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) during 2010 -11 with an outlay of Rs.350 crores for the 
XI Plan with the following objectives. 

▪ To enhance the resilience of Indian agriculture covering crops, livestock and fisheries to 
climatic variability and climate change through development and application of improved 
production and risk management technologies 

▪ To demonstrate site specific technology packages on farmers‟ fields for adapting to 
current climate risks 
▪ To enhance the capacity building of scientists and other stakeholders in climate resilient 
agricultural research and its application. 

Structure of Scheme: 

Both short term and long terms outputs are expected from the project in terms of new and 
improved varieties of crops, livestock breeds, management practices that help in adaptation and 
mitigation and inputs for policy making to mainstream climate resilient agriculture in the 
developmental planning. The overall expected outcome is enhanced resilience of agricultural 
production to climate variability in vulnerable regions. The project is comprised of four 
components. 

1) Strategic research on adaptation and mitigation 

2) Technology demonstration on farmers‟ fields to cope with current climate variability 

3) Sponsored and competitive research grants to fill critical research gaps 

4) Capacity building of different stake holders 

Eligibility: All the rural districts in the country. 

For detail Information visit: http://www.nicra -icar.in/nicrarevised/index.php/home1

22 1.8 Name of Scheme: Integrated Scheme for Agricultural Marketing (ISAM) 

Integrated Scheme for Agricultural Marketing (ISAM) is to provide farmers with access to 
competitive markets with adequate infrastructure including cold chain logistics, to enable them 
to realise better prices on the one hand and providing nutritious food to consumers at stable and 
affordable prices on the other. 

Central Government has been promoting creation and improvement of marketing infrastructure, 
capacity building and generating access to market information. These schemes have been further 
fine-tuned and will be continued with the objective of encouraging new technologies, promoting 
investment, improving the outreach of the schemes and removing constraints that hinder efficient 
and effective outcomes. Further, all schemes for strengthening this sector has been brought under 
one umbrella. 

The ISAM will have the following five sub schemes: 

• Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure (AMI) [the existing schemes of Grameen Bhandaran 
Yojana (GBY) and Development/Strengthening of Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure, 
Grading and Standardization (AMIGS) will be merged as AMI] 

• Marketing Research and Information Network (MRIN) 

• Strengthening of Agmark Grading Facilities (SAGF), 

• Agribusiness Development (ABD) through Venture Capital Assistance (VCA) and Project 
Development Facility (PDF) and 

• Choudhary Charan Singh National Institute of Agriculture Marketing (NIAM) 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2014 
Objectives: 
• To promote creation of agricultural marketing infrastructure by providing backend subsidy 
support to State, cooperative and private sector investments. 

• To promote creation of scientific storage capacity and to promote pledge financing to increase 
farmers‟ income. 

• To promote Integrated Value Chains (confined up to the stage of primary processing only) to 
provide vertical integration of farmers with primary processors.

23 • To use ICT as a vehicle of extension to sensitize and orient farmers to respond to new 
challenges in agricultural marketing. 

• To establish a nation -wide information network system for speedy collection and 
dissemination of market information and data on arrivals and prices for its efficient and timely 
utilization by farmers and other stake holders. 

• To support framing of grade standards and quality certification of agricultural commodities to 
help farmers get better and remunerative prices for their graded produce. 

• To catalyze private investment in setting up of agribusiness projects and thereby provide 
assured market to producers and strengthen backward linkages of agribusiness projects with 
producers and their groups. 

• To undertake and promote training, research, education, extension and consultancy in the agri 
marketing sector. 

Salient features: 

The Marketing Division in the Department of Agriculture is the overall incharge of policy 
formulation for the agricultural marketing sector. The Directorate of Marketing & Inspection 
(DMI) an attached office of the Department will implement the three sub schemes viz. 
Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure (AMI), Marketing Research and Information Network 
(MRIN) and Strengthening of Agmark Grading Facilities (SAGF); Small Farmers Agribusiness 
Consortium (SFAC), an autonomous organisation will implement the sub scheme of 
Agribusiness Development (ABD) through Venture Capital Assistance (VCA) and Project 
Development Facility (PDF) and Chaudhary Charan Singh National Institute of Agriculture 
Marketing (NIAM), also an autonomous organisation under the Department will provide 
training, research and consultancy to stakeholders in the agri marketing sector. 

Structure of Scheme: 

While separate guidelines have been formulated for each of the sub scheme to be implemented 
by the respective organisations, however, the Marketing Division of Department of Agriculture 
and Cooperation will have overarching responsibilities for the smooth implementation of the sub 
schemes. Towards this, Marketing Division may claim up to 0.5% of the scheme funds at its 
level for incurring administrative expenditure towards more effective MIS, monitoring, impact 
assessment, hiring consultants, conducting studies, researches and any other facilitative 
mechanism for more effective implementation. 

Funding Pattern: 

Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure (AMI) :

24 Minimum promoter‟s contribution should be 20% of the project cost. Minimum term loan 
(including subsidy) to be sanctioned by the Financial Institutions should be 50% of the project 
cost. 

For Infrastructure Projects Other Than Storage Infrastructure the rate of subsidy (on capital cost) 
for North Eastern States, Sikkim, UTs of Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands, hilly 
areas is 33.33%, subject to a maximum of Rs. 400 lakhs. The subsidy rate (on capital cost) for 
Registered FPOs, Panchayats, Women, Scheduled Caste (SC)/ Scheduled Tribe (ST) 
beneficiaries or their cooperatives Self -help groups is 33.33% subject to maximum of Rs. 300 
lakhs and for all Other categories of beneficiaries the rate of subsidy is 25% subject to a 
maximum of Rs. 225 lakhs. 

For infrastructure projects other than storage infrastructure, the rate of subsidy for North Eastern 
States, Sikkim, States of Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, UTs of Andaman 
& Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands, hilly and tribal areas is 33.33% subject to a maximum of 
Rs. 500 lakhs. The rate for Registered FPOs, Women, Scheduled Caste (SC)/ Scheduled Tribe 
(ST) beneficiaries and their cooperatives is 33.33% subject to maximum of Rs. 500 lakhs and for 
all other categories of beneficiaries it is 25% subject to a maximum of Rs. 400 lakhs. 

Agri-Business Development (ABD): 

SFAC would provide venture capital to agri -business projects by way of soft loan to supplement 
the financial gap worked out by the sanctioning authority of term loan under Ministry of Finance 
with respect to cost of project. 

Choudhary Charan Singh National Institute of Agricultural Marketing (NIAM): 

100% Central funding. 

Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: http://mofpi.nic.in/sites/default/files/ISAM%20 -GuidelinesXII - 
Plan.pdf 

 

 
1.9 Name of Scheme: Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH) 

Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH) is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
for the holistic growth of the horticulture sector covering fruits, vegetables, root & tuber crops, 
mushrooms, spices, flowers, aromatic plants, coconut, cashew, cocoa and bamboo. The scheme 
integrates the ongoing schemes of National Horticulture Mission, Horticulture Mission for North

25 East & Himalayan States, National Bamboo Mission, National Horticulture Board, Coconut 
Development Board and Central Institute for Horticulture, Nagaland. 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2014 -15 
Objectives: 
• It seeks to provide technical advice and administrative support to state governments/ SHM/ 
state horticultural missions for programmes such as Saffron Mission and Vegetable Initiative for 
Urban Clusters 
• The mission aims to promote holistic growth of horticulture including bamboo and coconut 
through regionally differentiated strategies like: 

- R&D promotion 

- Extension 

- Post harvest management 

- Processing and marketing 

• It also aims to encourage the aggregation of farmers into groups such as FIGs/FPOs and FPCs 
to facilitate economy of scale and scope 

• Aim is also to enhance horticulture production, augment the income of farmers and strengthen 
food security 

• Support job creation, especially in cold chain sector and boost productivity 

Salient features : 

It integrated the following 6 schemes/ scheme implementing agencies: 

- National Horticulture Mission, 

- Horticulture Mission for North East & Himalayan States, 

- National Bamboo Mission, 

- National Horticulture Board, 

- Coconut Development Board and

26 - Central Institute for Horticulture, Nagaland 

Funding Pattern : 

While Government of India (GOI) contributes 85% of total outlay for developmental 
programmes in all the states except the states in North East and Himalayas, 15% share is 
contributed by State Governments. In the case of North Eastern States and Himalayan States, 
GOI contribution is 100%. Similarly, for development of bamboo and programmes of National 
Horticulture Board (NHB), Coconut Development Board (CDB), Central Institute for 
Horticulture (CIH), Nagaland and the National Level Agencies (NLA), GOI contribution will be 
100%. 

Area of Operation: 

MIDH will have the following sub-schemes and area of operation: 

1. NHM All states & UTs except states in NE and Himalayan Region. 

2. HMNEH All states in NE and Himalayan Region. 

3. NBM All states & UTs 

4. NHB All states & UTs focusing on commercial horticulture 

5. CDB All States and UTs where coconut is grown. 

6. CIH NE states, focusing on HRD and capacity building. 

For detail Information visit: http://midh.gov.in/PDF/midh(English).pdf 

 

1.10 Name of Scheme: Sub-Mission on Agricultural Mechanization 
Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2014 -15 

Objectives: 

The Mission objectives are as follows: (i) Increasing the reach of farm mechanization to small 
and marginal farmers and to the regions where availability of farm power is low; (ii) Promoting 
„Custom Hiring Centres‟ to offset the adverse economies of scale arising due to small 
landholding and high cost of individual ownership; (iii) Creating hubs for hi -tech & high value 
farm equipments; (iv) Creating awareness among stakeholders through demonstration and

27 capacity building activities; (v) Ensuring performance testing and certification at designated 
testing centres located all over the country. 

Salient features : 

To achieve the above objectives, the Mission will adopt the following strategies: (i) Conduct 
performance testing for various farm machineries and equipments at the four Farm Machinery 
Training and Testing Institutes (FMTTIs), designated State Agricultural Universities (SAUs) and 
ICAR institutions; (ii) Promote farm mechanization among stakeholders by way of on -field and 
off-field training and demonstrations. (iii) Provide financial assistance to farmers for 
procurement of farm machinery and implements (iv) Establish custom hiring centres location and 
crop specific farm machinery and implements (v) Provide financial assistance to small and 
marginal farmers for hiring machinery and implements in low mechanized regions. 

Mission Components 

• Promotion and strengthening of Agricultural Mechanization via training, testing and 
demonstration. 
• Demonstration, training and distribution of the Post Harvest Technology and 
Management (PHTM). 

• Financial assistance to obtain agricultural machinery and equipment. 

• Establish farm machinery banks for custom hiring. 

• Establish a Hi-Tech and high productive equipment hub for custom hiring. 

• Promotion of farm mechanization in selected villages. 

• Financial assistance to promote mechanized operations per hectare carried out through 
custom hiring centres. 
• Promote farm machinery and equipment in the North -Eastern Region. 

Funding Pattern : For states of Northern -Eastern and Himalayan region, the share of Govt. of 
India & State Govt. is 90:10. 

Eligibility : Small and marginal farmers 

Area of Operation: All States. 

For detail Information visit: http://agricoop.gov.in/sites/default/files/SMAM%20%282%29.pdf

28 1.11 Name of Scheme: Sub -Mission on Agroforestry (SMAF) under NMSA 

Agroforestry is known to have the potential to mitigate the climate change effects through 
microclimate moderation, conservation of natural resources and creation of additional source of 
livelihood and income opportunities. In order to make agriculture less vulnerable to climatic 
aberrations, Government of India formulated the National Agroforestry Policy in 2014. The 
policy recommends for setting up of a Mission or Board to address development of agroforestry 
sector in an organised manner. The Sub -Mission on Agroforestry (SMAF) under NMSA is an 
initiative to this end. The aim of the submission is to expand the tree coverage on farmland in 
complementary with agricultural crops. 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2014 
Objectives: 
• To encourage and expand tree plantation in complementary and integrated manner with 
crops and livestock to improve productivity, employment opportunities, income 
generation and livelihoods of rural households, especially the small farmers. 

• To ensure availability of quality planting material like seeds, seedlings, clones, hybrids, 
improved varieties, etc. 

• To popularise various Agroforestry practices/models suitable to different agro ecological 
regions and land use conditions. 

• To create database, information and knowledge support in the area of agroforestry. 

• To provide extension and capacity building support to agroforestry sector. 

Salient features : 

To achieve these objectives for stimulating the growth of agroforestry in India, SMAF will have 
following multi -pronged strategy: 

• Expanding the coverage under tree plantation in arable land suitable to local agro climatic 
and land use conditions to provide livelihood, environmental and bio diversity protection 
by encouraging farmers to grow trees in their farmland along with crops/cropping 
systems and/or livestock as an integral component of farming system. 

• Promoting setting up of new small nurseries and hi -tech big nurseries for producing 
quality planting materials like seeds, seedlings, clones, improved varieties to meet the 
requirement of quality planting material /seeds for the farmers.

29 • Promoting various Agroforestry practices/models suitable to different agro ecological 
regions and land use conditions that will support adaptation and mitigation efforts in 
climate change. Promoting sustainable Agrisilvicultural systems, Silvipastoral systems, 
Agrisilvopastoral system, other systems of agroforestry viz. Apiculture with Trees, Aqua 
forestry etc. 

• Promoting Peripheral and Boundary Plantation on farms will serve as fencing of farm, 
demarcation of farm boundary, stabilizing farm bonds, protecting from soil erosion, 
improving soil moisture, enrichment of soil organic matter without affecting coverage 
under crops. 

• Low Density Plantation on Farm Lands including intermediate/strip plantation, High 
Density Block Plantation will also be supported in complementarily with crops/cropping 
system as agroforestry system. 

• Creating database on area under agorforestry, status of soil organic carbon, information 
and knowledge support etc. with use of ICT. 
• Capacity building / training for Development officials/workers, scientists and farmers 
under National & International exchange programmes; extension activities including 
Demonstration of suitable Agrisilvicultural, Silvipastoral, agrisilvopastoral system etc., 
Seminars/workshops / conferences/fairs & exhibitions and exposure visits at National and 
International level. 

• Implementation of the scheme only in the states having liberalized transit regulations for 
transport of timber and will be extended to other states as and when such relaxations are 
notified by them. Liberal transit rules will be a precondition for availing the benefit of the 
programmme. 

• Endemic and other species including trees of medicinal value suitable to the agroclimatic 
conditions will be promoted under the programme. Any species which are exotic, not 
suitable to the agro -ecology and not part of approved afforestation programme will not be 
supported. 

• Soil Health Cards will be made a pre -requisite for farmers getting the benefit under the 
programme to indicate the soil carbon status and facilitating assessment of Soil Carbon 
improvement from time to time. 

• The choice of stock type (bare -root or container or poly bags) used may depend on 
species, local availability, planting method preferred or cost. It is important that the 
seedlings for plantation should be of the highest quality possible. The shoot and root 
systems of the stock must be large enough and in balance so that the seedlings have a 
good probability of establishing and competing successfully in the field. A good

30 fibrous/tape root system is desirable for most species. Seedlings should be free from 
diseases, and appear healthy. In particular, checking the quality of the roots system will 
be emphasised. It is important to be satisfied that the plants conform to 
Forest/Horticulture Department‟s regulations or, any other National/State regulations on 
quality. 

Funding Pattern : 

For states of Northern -Eastern region, the share of Govt. of India & State Govt. is 90:10. 

• Farmers would be supported financial assistance to the extent of 50% of the actual cost of 
the interventions (limited to 50% of the estimated cost as indicated in the Cost norms) for 
the respective interventions. 

• Farmers groups/ Cooperatives/Farmer Producers Organization (FPO) can also avail the 
benefit of the programme but the assistance can be accessed as per norms and provisions 
applicable to the individual farmers. 

• At least 50% of the allocation is to be utilized for small, marginal farmers of which 
atleast 30% are women beneficiaries/ farmers. Further 16% & 8% of the total allocation 
or in proportion of SC/ST population in the district will be utilized for Special 
Component Plan (SCP) and Tribal Sub Plan (TSP) respectively. 

Eligibility : Farmers, Farmers groups/ Cooperatives/Farmer Producers Organization (FPO) 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: 
http://agricoop.gov.in/sites/default/files/Agroforestory_Guidelines_English.pdf 

 

 
1.12 Name of Scheme: Rainfed Area Development Programme (RADP) 

Rainfed Area Development Programme (RADP) was implemented as a sub -scheme under 
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY). 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 

Year of Commencement: 2014 -15

31 Objectives: The programme aims at improving the quality of life of farmers' especially small 
and marginal farmers by offering a complete package of activities to maximize the farm returns 
for enhancing his/her food and livelihood security. 

The broad objectives are: a) Increasing agricultural productivity of rainfed areas in a sustainable 
manner by adopting appropriate farming system based approaches. b) To minimize the adverse 
impact of possible crop failure due to drought, flood or un -even rainfall distribution through 
diversified and composite farming systems. c) Restoration of confidence in rainfed agriculture by 
creating sustained employment opportunities through improved on-farm technologies and 
cultivation practices. d) Enhancement of farmers' income and livelihood support for reduction of 
poverty in rainfed areas. e) Convergence of relevant developmental programmes in project areas 
for optimal utilization of resources by establishing an integrated and coordinated system 
involving different sectors and institutions. 

Salient features : 

The strategy would focus on multi -cropping, rotational cropping, inter-cropping, mixed - 
cropping along with allied activities that include horticulture, livestock etc. 

This would not only maximise farm returns but also mitigate impacts of floods, drought etc. To 
do this the programme will focus on – 

• Minimum tillage practice, 

• Support of existing income generating activities like fisheries, agriculture, mushroom etc. 
Conducting complementary activities like construction of ponds, land treatment, wells, 
supply of pumps etc, 

• Adoption of a cluster approach to utilize the potential of available or created common 
resources, 

• Support for value addition and storage structures to facilitate better returns for farm produce. 

Funding Pattern : Financial resources of Rs 100,000/ - will be provided to farmers in arid & 
semi -arid zones and Rs 80,000/ - for sub-humid & humid areas. 

Eligibility : Small and marginal farmers 

Area of Operation: The programme would be implemented in all rainfed areas which have large 
areas of cultivable land and which have potential for increasing agricultural productivity. Other 
areas would be - 

• The districts having less than 60% of cultivated area under irrigation and influenced by 
arid, semi -arid etc agro-ecosystems

32 • Areas already developed under watershed development schemes, 

• Areas where water resources have been developed under MNREGA etc, 

For detail Information visit: http://agricoop.gov.in/sites/default/files/RADP.pdf 

 

 
1.13 Name of Scheme: Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) 

The new Crop Insurance Scheme is in line with One Nation – One Scheme theme. It 
incorporates the best features of all previous schemes and at the same time, all previous 
shortcomings / weaknesses have been removed. The PMFBY will replace the existing two 
schemes National Agricultural Insurance Scheme as well as the Modified NAIS. 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 

Year of Commencement: 2016 

Objectives: Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) aims at supporting sustainable 
production in agriculture sector by way of 
• Providing financial support to farmers suffering crop loss/damage arising out of unforeseen 
events 

• Stabilizing the income of farmers to ensure their continuance in farming 

• Encouraging farmers to adopt innovative and modern agricultural practices 

• Ensuring flow of credit to the agriculture sector which will contribute to food security, crop 
diversification and enhancing growth and competitiveness of agriculture sector besides 
protecting farmers from production risks. 

Salient features : 

There will be a uniform premium of only 2% to be paid by farmers for all Kharif crops and 1.5% 
for all Rabi crops. In case of annual commercial and horticultural crops, the premium to be paid 
by farmers will be only 5%. The premium rates to be paid by farmers are very low and balance 
premium will be paid by the Government to provide full insured amount to the farmers against 
crop loss on account of natural calamities. 

There is no upper limit on Government subsidy. Even if balance premium is 90%, it will be 
borne by the Government.

33 Earlier, there was a provision of capping the premium rate which resulted in low claims being 
paid to farmers. This capping was done to limit Government outgo on the premium subsidy. This 
capping has now been removed and farmers will get claim against full sum insured without any 
reduction. 

The use of technology will be encouraged to a great extent. Smart phones will be used to capture 
and upload data of crop cutting to reduce the delays in claim payment to farmers. Remote 
sensing will be used to reduce the number of crop cutting experiments. 

PMFBY is a replacement scheme of NAIS / MNAIS, there will be exemption from Service Tax 
liability of all the services involved in the implementation of the scheme. It is estimated that the 
new scheme will ensure about 75-80 per cent of subsidy for the farmers in insurance premium. 

Funding Pattern : As per details in the guidelines 

Eligibility : All farmers including sharecroppers and tenant farmers growing the notified crops in 
the notified areas are eligible for coverage. 

Compulsory coverage: The enrolment under the scheme, subject to possession of insurable 
interest on the cultivation of the notified crop in the notified area, shall be compulsory for 
following categories of farmers: 

• Farmers in the notified area who possess a Crop Loan account/KCC account (called as 
Loanee Farmers) to whom credit limit is sanctioned/renewed for the notified crop during the crop 
season. and 

• Such other farmers whom the Government may decide to include from time to time. 

Voluntary coverage : Voluntary coverage may be obtained by all farmers not covered above, 
including Crop KCC/Crop Loan Account holders whose credit limit is not renewed. 

Area of Operation 

This scheme will be implemented in every state of India, in association with respective State 
Governments. 

For detail Information visit: https://pmfby.gov.in/pdf/Revised_Operational_Guidelines.pdf

34 1.14 Name of Scheme: Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) 

Government of India is committed to accord high priority to water conservation and its 
management. To this effect Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) has been 
formulated with the vision of extending the coverage of irrigation „Har Khet ko pani‟ and 
improving water use efficiency „More crop per drop' in a focused manner with end to end 
solution on source creation, distribution, management, field application and extension activities. 
PMKSY has been formulated amalgamating ongoing schemes viz. Accelerated Irrigation Benefit 
Programme (AIBP) of the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation (MoWR,RD&GR), Integrated Watershed Management Programme (IWMP) of 
Department of Land Resources (DoLR) and the On Farm Water Management (OFWM) of 
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC). 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2015 
Objectives of the scheme: 
The broad objectives of PMKSY will be:- 

a) Achieve convergence of investments in irrigation at the field level (preparation of district level 
and, if required, sub district level water use plans). 

b) Enhance the physical access of water on the farm and expand cultivable area under assured 
irrigation (Har Khet ko pani). 

c) Integration of water source, distribution and its efficient use, to make best use of water 
through appropriate technologies and practices. 

d) Improve on -farm water use efficiency to reduce wastage and increase availability both in 
duration and extent, 

e) Enhance the adoption of precision -irrigation and other water saving technologies (More crop 
per drop). 

f) Enhance recharge of aquifers and introduce sustainable water conservation practices. 

g) Ensure the integrated development of rainfed areas using the watershed approach towards soil 
and water conservation, regeneration of ground water, arresting runoff, providing livelihood 
options and other NRM activities. 

h) Promote extension activities relating to water harvesting, water management and crop 
alignment for farmers and grass root level field functionaries.

35 i) Explore the feasibility of reusing treated municipal waste water for peri-urban agriculture, and 

j) Attract greater private investments in irrigation. 

This will in turn increase agricultural production and productivity and enhance farm income. 

Salient features: 

To achieve above objectives, PMKSY will strategize by focussing on end -to end solution in 
irrigation supply chain, viz. water sources, distribution network, efficient farm level applications, 
extension services on new technologies & information etc. Broadly, PMKSY will focus on:- 

a) Creation of new water sources; repair, restoration and renovation of defunct water sources; 
construction of water harvesting structures, secondary & micro storage, groundwater 
development, enhancing potentials of traditional water bodies at village level like Jal Mandir 
(Gujarat); Khatri, Kuhl (H.P.); Zabo (Nagaland); Eri, Ooranis (T.N.); Dongs (Assam); Katas, 
Bandhas (Odisha and M.P.) etc. 

b) Developing/augmenting distribution network where irrigation sources (both assured and 
protective) are available or created; 
c) Promotion of scientific moisture conservation and run off control measures to improve ground 
water recharge so as to create opportunities for farmer to access recharged water through shallow 
tube/dug wells; 

d) Promoting efficient water conveyance and field application devices within the farm viz, 
underground piping system, Drip & Sprinklers, pivots, rain -guns and other application devices 
etc.; 

e) Encouraging community irrigation through registered user groups/farmer producers‟ 
organisations/NGOs; and 
f) Farmer oriented activities like capacity building, training and exposure visits, demonstrations, 
farm schools, skill development in efficient water and crop management practices (crop 
alignment) including large scale awareness on more crop per drop of water through mass media 
campaign, exhibitions, field days, and extension activities through short animation films etc. 

The aforesaid areas only outline the broad contours of PMKSY; combination of interventions 
may be required depending on location specific conditions and requirements, which will be 
identified through District and State Irrigation Plans. More focus on irrigation development will 
be given to deficient states in terms of irrigation coverage.

36 Structure of Scheme: 

PMKSY will have following programme components: 

A. Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme (AIBP) 

a) To focus on faster completion of ongoing Major and Medium Irrigation including National 
Projects. 

B. PMKSY (Har Khet ko Pani) 

a) Creation of new water sources through Minor Irrigation (both surface and ground water) 

b) Repair, restoration and renovation of water bodies; strengthening carrying capacity of 
traditional water sources, construction rain water harvesting structures (Jal Sanchay); 

c) Command area development, strengthening and creation of distribution network from source 
to the farm; 

d) Ground water development in the areas where it is abundant, so that sink is created to store 
runoff/ flood water during peak rainy season. 

e) Improvement in water management and distribution system for water bodies to take advantage 
of the available source which is not tapped to its fullest capacity (deriving benefits from low 
hanging fruits). At least 10% of the command area to be covered under micro/precision 
irrigation. 

f) Diversion of water from source of different location where it is plenty to nearby water scarce 
areas, lift irrigation from water bodies/rivers at lower elevation to supplement requirements 
beyond IWMP and MGNREGS irrespective of irrigation command. 

g) Creating and rejuvenating traditional water storage systems like Jal Mandir (Gujarat); Khatri, 
Kuhl (H.P.); Zabo (Nagaland); Eri, Ooranis (T.N.); Dongs (Assam); Katas, Bandhas (Odisha and 
M.P.) etc. at feasible locations. 

C. PMKSY (Per Drop More Crop) 

a) Programme management, preparation of State/District Irrigation Plan, approval of annual 
action plan, Monitoring etc. 

b) Promoting efficient water conveyance and precision water application devices like drips, 
sprinklers, pivots, rain-guns in the farm (Jal Sinchan);

37 c) Topping up of input cost particularly under civil construction beyond permissible limit (40%), 
under MGNREGS for activities like lining inlet, outlet, silt traps, distribution system etc. 

d) Construction of micro irrigation structures to supplement source creation activities including 
tube wells and dug wells (in areas where ground water is available and not under semi critical 
/critical /over exploited category of development) which are not supported under AIBP, PMKSY 
(Har Khet ko Pani), PMKSY (Watershed) and MGNREGS as per block/district irrigation plan. 
e) Secondary storage structures at tail end of canal system to store water when available in 
abundance (rainy season) or from perennial sources like streams for use during dry periods 
through effective on-farm water management; 

f) Water lifting devices like diesel/ electric/ solar pumpsets including water carriage pipes, 
underground piping system. 

g) Extension activities for promotion of scientific moisture conservation and agronomic 
measures including cropping alignment to maximise use of available water including rainfall and 
minimise irrigation requirement (Jal sarankchan); 

h) Capacity building, training and awareness campaign including low cost publications, use of 
pico projectors and low cost films for encouraging potential use water source through 
technological, agronomic and management practices including community irrigation. 

i) The extension workers will be empowered to disseminate relevant technologies under PMKSY 
only after requisite training is provided to them especially in the area of promotion of scientific 
moisture conservation and agronomic measures, improved/ innovative distribution system like 
pipe and box outlet system, etc. Appropriate Domain Experts will act as Master Trainers. 

j) Information Communication Technology (ICT) interventions through NeGP -A to be made use 
in the field of water use efficiency, precision irrigation technologies, on farm water management, 
crop alignment etc. and also to do intensive monitoring of the Scheme. 

D. PMKSY (Watershed Development) 

a) Effective management of runoff water and improved soil & moisture conservation activities 
such as ridge area treatment, drainage line treatment, rain water harvesting, in -situ moisture 
conservation and other allied activities on watershed basis. 

b) Converging with MGNREGS for creation of water source to full potential in identified 
backward rainfed blocks including renovation of traditional water bodies

38 Funding Pattern: 

PMKSY funds would be given to states would be 60:40 between the Central Govt. share and 
State Govt. share for all States except North Eastern States and Himalayan States. The funding 
pattern shall be 90:10 for North Eastern and Himalayan States. 

Eligibility: Instead of incremental budgeting, PMKSY will adopt a dynamic annual fund 
allocation methodology that mandates States to allocate more funds to irrigation sectors for 
becoming eligible to access PMKSY funds. A State will become eligible to access PMKSY fund 
only if it has prepared the District Irrigation Plan (DIP) and State Irrigation Plan (SIP). Hence 
Preparation of DIP and SIP are mandatory. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: http://pmksy.gov.in/pdflinks/Guidelines_English.pdf 

 

1.15 Name of Scheme: Sankalp Se Siddhi 

It is an integrated scheme that the central government has taken for the betterment of the nation. 
Under this scheme major social and economical issues will be covered. The New India 
Movement 2017 -2022 envisages India free from poverty, corruption, terrorism, communalism, 
casteism and uncleanliness and unite the entire country by adopting good governance and using 
technology. 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2017 
Objectives of the scheme: 
"Sankalp se Siddhi" (Attainment through Resolve) scheme, which aims at good governance, is a 
five year plan under which new India movement 2017 -2022 would take place. 

Salient features: 

• Under this scheme events and other social activities will be organised. Through these 
events the authorities will make the citizens understand and aware of many issues in 
India. 
• Discrimination, caste, religion, poverty, education, hygiene and many more issues will be 
raised in this program to eradicate all sorts of problems from the country. 
• Sankalp se Siddhi Program or Scheme will focus on 6 -7 major sectors or issues in the 
country. These issues will be raised through various events under the scheme. The issues

39 are clean India, Literate India, Poverty -free, Corruption -free, Terrorism -free, 
Communalism -free and Caste -discrimination free India. 

Funding Pattern: 100% Central assistance. 

Eligibility: People belonging to the lower income category including Tribal families. 

Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: http://pmjandhanyojana.co.in/sankalp -se-siddhi -scheme/ 

 

1.16 Name of Scheme: Gramin Agricultural Markets (GrAMs) 

Retail agricultural markets in close proximity of the farm gate, that promote and service a more 
efficient transaction of the farmers‟ produce across the agricultural sub-sectors, by enabling both 
direct sale, between the producer and consumer, and aggregation of small produce -lots for 
subsequent transaction, both of which can occur either physically or online 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2018 
Objectives: 
They shall facilitate two following activities in principle. i. Direct sale The farmer -producers 
may offer any of their agri -produce on sale directly to the consumers without having to go 
through the market regulations. The consumer could be a retail purchaser or a bulk purchaser 
(trader, processor, exporter etc); and the sale can occur through a physical negotiation or via an 
online trade platform like e -NAM. The disintermediation of such a transaction will result in 
transferring maximum value to the farmer on his produce. ii. Aggregation of the lots The small 
lots of the farmer -producers can be aggregated through an institutional mechanism (like that of 
FPO, VPO, etc.) for gaining enhanced bargaining power and subsequent sale either at the 
GrAMs via an online trade platform like e-NAM or by availing primary preparatory or 
preconditioning services, such as assaying, cooling, packaging, and transporting from the 
GrAMs to APMC/RMC or any other primary or secondary or terminal wholesale agricultural 
market. 
Salient features : 

The GrAMs shall be organisationally linked to primary wholesale agricultural markets like 
APMCs/RMCs, whether in public or private sector and the two together shall provide a hub and 
spoke model of agricultural market structure. Some of the specific advantages of GrAMs are as

40 follows: i. Reduce cost of first mile transportation by offering the farmers a marketing platform 
in close proximity to the farm gates. ii. Reduce cost of transaction and enable the farmers to gain 
higher share in the consumers‟ rupee by facilitating direct sale – both physical and online. iii. 
Provide an orderly and transparent system of aggregating the small lots and substitute for the 
currently opaque & informal system of aggregation by the village traders. iv. Provide small 
farmers the opportunity to target direct sales at markets of their own volition by providing the 
associated market linkage services. v. Provide greater opportunity for mobilization of farmers 
through mechanisms like farmer producer organisations (FPOs -societies, cooperatives and 
companies), as well as Village Producer Organisations (VPOs). vi. Offer an integrated platform 
for purchase of agri -inputs, besides other consumer & white goods. vii. Serve as a place for 
dissemination of new information & knowledge relating to agriculture and other aspects of life. 

Funding Pattern : The Cabinet Committee of Economic Affairs Chaired by Prime Minister 
Narendra Modi today gave its approval for the creation of a corpus of Rs. 2000 crore for Agri - 
Market Infrastructure Fund (AMIF) to be created with NABARD for development and up - 
gradation of agricultural marketing infrastructure in Gramin Agricultural Markets and Regulated 
Wholesale Markets. 

AMIF will provide the State/UT Governments subsidized loan for their proposal for developing 
marketing infrastructure in 585 Agriculture Produce Market Committees (APMCs) and 10,000 
Grameen Agricultural Markets (GrAMs). States may also access AMIF for innovative integrated 
market infrastructure projects including Hub and Spoke mode and in Public Private Partnership 
mode. In these GrAMs, physical and basic infrastructure will be strengthened using MGNREGA 
and other Government Schemes. 

After approval of AMIF Scheme, the interest subsidy will be provided by DAC&FW to 
NABARD in alignment with annual budget releases during 2018 -19 and 2019 -20 as well as upto 
2024 -25. 

Eligibility : Small and marginal farmers 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: http://agricoop.gov.in/sites/default/files/final_gram_guide.pdf

41 Ministry of Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying 

2.1 Name of Scheme: Assistance to Fodder Block Making Units 
Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2010 

Objectives: 

Promote conservation of fodder by converting crop residues into fodder blocks through the use 
of modern technologies, bailing machines etc. into fodder blocks 

Salient features : 

Central Government will provide subsidy @ Rs. 42.50 lakhs per unit or 50% of the cost of straw/ 
Bagasse based fodder block making units, whichever is lower. Smaller models will also be 
supported under the scheme. This type of feed will be useful during drought/flood etc. when the 
main objective is survival/maintenance of livestock population. 

Funding Pattern : 

50 % Central assistance as one time subsidy to the extent of Rs. 42.50 lakhs per unit or 50% of 
the cost of straw based fodder block making units, whichever is lower will be provided The 
assistance will be provided for the items given in Annexure I. However, this assistance will be 
provided to only those units having bankable projects appraised for their viability by any 
Nationalized Bank/ NABARD. 

Eligibility : 

Fodder block making units under Public or Private entrepreneurship. However, funds will be 
released through state Govts concerned. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: https://dahd.nic.in/sites/default/filess/Fodder - 
Feed%20Guidelines%20%20%2010_0.pdf

42 2.2 Name of Scheme: Fodder Seed Procurement and Distribution 
Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2010 

Objectives: 

Promote cultivation of superior variety of fodder for fodder seed (breeder, foundation and 
certified seed) production by creating assured market and distribution of seeds among the 
farmers. 

Salient features : 

To create an assured market for quality fodder seed, this component has been modified. Now 
state Govts. will assess the requirement of fodder seeds of the state & will make an agreement 
with seed supplying agency for supply of each fodder seed inclusive of transportation cost upto 
delivery place & time of supply of seeds. The seed supplying agencies in turn will make a buy 
back arrangement of fodder seeds produced by the farmers. After procurement of fodder seeds, 
state Govt. will distribute these seeds to farmers free of cost. Thereby passing on Central State 
Grant to the farmers. For Ist year truthfully labeled seeds may be allowed but from 2011 -12 only 
certified seeds will be given preference, for which seed certification norms exist in the. 

Funding Pattern : 

The assistance under the scheme will be provided as 75 % Central grant with share of 25% to be 
arranged by implementing agencies/ state. 

Implementing Agencies: 

Department of Animal Husbandry, Agriculture of the States. States may involve NGO, SHG, 
NSC, Milk Federation for supply of seeds. Funds will be routed through SIAs. 
Eligibility : 

Farmers, NGOs and the state Govts. May involve SIAs/ Milk Federation. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

 

For detail Information visit: https://dahd.nic.in/sites/default/filess/Fodder - 
Feed%20Guidelines%20%20%2010_0.pdf

43 2.3 Name of Scheme: Assistance for Introduction of Hand Driven Chaff Cutter 
Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2010 

Objectives: 

Reduce wastage of fodder by chopping and promote better utilization of fodder. 

Salient features : 

Members of Milk Federation, ATMA/ KVKs and farmers having upto 5 livestock will be 
assisted under the scheme for purchases of the hand driven chaff cutters provided they have not 
availed earlier this type of benefit from Central Govt. or State Govt./any other organization 
formed by the Govt. 

Funding Pattern : 

Assistance under the scheme will be provided as 75% Central Govt. as one time grant out of the 
total cost of Rs. 5ooo/ - per unit or 75% cost of the chaff cutters, which ever is less. Balance 25% 
funds are to be met by the beneficiaries. Adequate number of woman, SC/ST beneficiaries may 
be covered. Balance 25% share to be met by the beneficiaries 

Eligibility : Farmers and Members of Milk Cooperatives/ ATMA/ KVKs. 

Implementing Agency: Milk Federation, Department of Animal Husbandry, KVKs/ATMA. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: https://dahd.nic.in/sites/default/filess/Fodder - 
Feed%20Guidelines%20%20%2010_0.pdf 

 

 
2.4 Name of Scheme: Assistance for Establishment of Area Specific Mineral Mixture / Feed 
Pelleting/ Feed Manufacturing Unit 
Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2010 
Objectives:

44 To enhance availability of feed and area specific mineral mixture for feeding livestock for 
improving their productivity and health. 

Salient features : 

By encouraging production of feed and area specific mineral mixture, the existing gap between 
availability of feed and mineral mixture could be narrowed down. However, this assistance will 
be provided to only those units having bankable projects appraised for their viability by 
NABARD or any other Nationalized Bank. 

Funding Pattern : 

Grant -in aid (subsidy) by the Central Government will be provided @ Rs. 25.00 lakhs per unit or 
25% of the cost of the plant and machinery required for establishment of mineral mixture/ feed 
pelleting/ feed manufacturing unit/ plant, whichever is lower. Smaller models will also be 
supported under the scheme. 

Implementing Agency: Area Specific Mineral Mixture / Feed Pelleting/ Feed Manufacturing 
Unit under Public or Private entrepreneurship. However, the funds would be released through 
state Govt. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: https://dahd.nic.in/sites/default/filess/Fodder - 
Feed%20Guidelines%20%20%2010_0.pdf 

 

2.5 Name of Scheme: National Livestock Mission (NLM) 

National Livestock Mission launched during 2014 -15 was formulated for development of 
livestock sector with the objectives to enhance the level of nutrition and standard of living of 
livestock keepers and farmers especially small holders through sustainable, safe and equitable 
livestock development. 
It broadly covers all the activities required to ensure quantitative and qualitative improvement in 
livestock production systems and capacity building of all stakeholders. The major outcomes of 
the Mission is to reduce the gap in demand and availability of feed and fodder, conservation and 
improvement of indigenous breeds, higher productivity and production in a sustainable and 
environment friendly manner, enhanced livelihood opportunities, especially in rainfed areas and 
for landless, small and marginal farmers, increased awareness, improved risk coverage and better

45 availability of quality animal products to consumers overall socio -economic upliftment of 
livestock rearers. It has four Sub-Missions are as under: - 
Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2014 -15 
Objectives: 
• Development and conservation of indigenous breeds; 
• Breed improvement programme for indigenous breeds so as to improve the genetic 
makeup and increase the stock; 
• Enhancing milk production and productivity of bovine population by increasing disease 
free high genetic merit female population and check on spread of diseases ; 
• Upgrading nondescript cattle using elite indigenous breeds like Gir, Sahiwal, Rathi, 
Deoni, Tharparkar, Red Sindhi ; 
• Distribution of disease free high genetic merit bulls for natural service; 
• To bring all breedable females under organised breeding through AI or natural service 
using germ plasm of high genetic merits; 
• To arrange quality Artificial Insemination (AI) services at farmers‟ doorstep; 
• To create e -market portal for bovine germplasm for connecting breeders and farmers; 
• To increase trade of livestock and livestock products by meeting out sanitary and phyto 
sanitary (SPS) issues; 
• To select breeding bulls of high genetic merit at a young age through application of 
genomics. 

Salient features : 
The Sub-Mission on Livestock Development: - 
There are provisions for productivity enhancement including new innovative pilot projects for 
small ruminants, pigs and poultry, Entrepreneurship Development and Employment Generation 
(bankable projects), strengthening of infrastructure of state farms with respect to modernization, 
automation and bio -security, conservation of threatened breeds, minor livestock development, 
rural slaughter houses, fallen animals and livestock insurance. 
The Sub-Mission on Pig Development in North -Eastern Region: 
There has been persistent demand from the North Eastern States seeking support for all round 
development of piggery in the region. For the first time, under NLM a Sub -Mission on Pig 
Development in North -Eastern Region is provided wherein Government of India would support

46 the State Piggery Farms, and import of germplasm so that eventually the masses get the benefit 
as it is linked to livelihood and contributes in providing protein -rich food in 8 NER States. 
The Sub-Mission on Fodder and Feed Development : 
Address the problems of scarcity of animal feed resources, in order to give a push to the 
livestock sector making it a competitive enterprise for India, and also to harness its export 
potential. The major objective is to reduce the deficit to nil. 
Sub-Mission on Skill Development, Technology Transfer and Extension: - 
The extension machinery at field level for livestock activities is very weak. As a result, farmers 
are not able to adopt the technologies developed by research institutions. The emergence of new 
technologies and practices require linkages between stakeholders and this sub-mission will 
enable a wider outreach to the farmers. 
All the States including NER States can avail the benefits of the multiple components and the 
flexibility of choosing them under NLM for a sustainable livestock development. 
Funding Pattern : 

he sub -scheme National Livestock Mission is being implemented on a cost sharing ratio of 60:40 
between Central & State Government except NE and Himalayan States where the ratio is 90:10 
and 100% in case of Union Territories. The component Entrepreneurship Development and 
Employment Generation (EDEG) and Small Livestock Institute are being implemented on 100% 
Central Assistance. However, the EDEG is a beneficiary oriented scheme wherein the entire 
subsidy portion (25% for General and 33.33% for SC&ST beneficiary) to eligible beneficiary is 
provided by Central Government through NABARD. Under EDEG the back ended subsidy in 
North - East /Hill /Left Wing Extremism (LWE) and difficult areas varies between 35% to 60%. 

Eligibility : Farmers. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

 

For detail Information visit: https://dahd.nic.in/national_livestock_mission

47 Ministry of Commerce and Industry 

3.1 Name of Scheme: Export Promotion Capital Goods (EPCG) 
Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2000 

Objectives of the scheme: 

Export Promotion Capital Goods (EPCG) scheme allows import of capital goods including 
spares for pre production, production and post production at zero duty subject to an export 
obligation of 6 times of duty saved on capital goods imported under EPCG scheme, to be 
fulfilled in 6 years reckoned from Authorization issue date. 

Salient features: 

EPCG authorization holder can export either directly or through third party (s). Export proceeds 
are to be realized in freely convertible currency except for deemed exports. Import of capital 
goods imported under the EPCG scheme shall be subject to Actual User condition till export 
obligation is completed. Export Obligation under EPCG scheme is required to be fulfilled by 
export of goods manufactured/services rendered by the applicant. There are two types of export 
oligation that are mandatory. First, Annual Average in which export obligation is over and 
above, the average level of exports achieved by the authorization holder in the preceding three 
licensing years for the same and similar products within the overall export obligation period 
including extended period, if any. Such average would be the arithmetic mean of export 
performance in the last three years for the same and similar products. Secondly, Specific 
Average which is 6 times the duty saved amount in which the Authorization holder shall also 
fulfil a minimum of 50% export obligation in each block of years - the first block being of 4 
years and the second block is of 2 years. 

EPCG Authorization holder may also source capital goods from a domestic manufacturer. Such 
domestic manufacturer shall be eligible for deemed export benefit under FTP. EPCG 
Authorization holders can opt for Technological Upgradation of existing capital good imported 
under EPCG Authorization. Import of second hand capital goods is not permitted under the 
EPCG scheme. 

To incentivize fast track companies to accelerate exports, there is a provision for early 
redemption and in cases where Authorization holder has fulfilled 75% or more of specific export 
obligation and 100% of Average Export Obligation till date, if any, in half or less than half the 
original export obligation period specified , remaining export obligation shall be condoned.

48 The scheme allows one or more requests for grant of extension in export obligation period, on 
payment of composition fee equal to 2% of proportionate duty saved amount on unfulfilled 
export obligation or an enhancement in export obligation imposed to the extent of 10% of total 
export obligation imposed under authorization, as the case may be, at the choice of exporter, for 
each year of extension sought. Such first extension in EO period can be for a maximum period of 
2 years. Extension in EO period beyond two years‟ period may be considered, for a further 
extension upto 2 years with a condition that 50% of duty payable in proportion to the unfulfilled 
export obligation is paid by authorization holder to Custom authorities before an endorsement of 
extension is made on EPCG authorization by RA concerned. In such cases, no composition fee is 
to be paid or additional EO is to be imposed. In case the firm is still not able to complete the 
export obligation, duty already deposited will be deducted from total duty plus interest to be paid 
for EO default. In case, EPCG authorization holder fails to fulfil prescribed export obligation, he 
shall pay duties of Customs plus interest as prescribed by Customs authority. This facility can 
also be availed by EPCG authorization holder to exit at his option. The EPCG Scheme provides 
for in addition, a specific EO of 75% of normal Export Obligation for export of Green 
Technology Products. The scheme also provides for Post Export EPCG duty credit scrip(s) 
which are available to exporters who intend to import capital goods on full payment of 
applicable duties in cash and choose to opt for this scheme. Further, for units located in 
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura and 
Jammu &Kashmir, specific EO shall be 25% of the EO. 

Eligibility: EPCG scheme covers manufacturer exporters with or without supporting 
manufacturer(s)/ vendor(s), merchant exporters tied to supporting manufacturer(s) and service 
providers. The Scheme also covers a service provider who is designated / certified as a Common 
Service Provider (CSP). 

Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: http://dgft.delhi.nic.in/dgftcla/pdffile/Schemes/EPCG.pdf 

 

3.2 Name of Scheme: Geographical Indications Registry 

A geographical indication (GI) is a name or sign used on certain products which corresponds to a 
specific geographical location or origin (e.g. a town, region, or country). India , as a member of 
the World Trade Organization (WTO), enacted the Geographical Indications of Goods 
(Registration and Protection) Act, 1999 has come into force with effect from 15 September 2003. 
GIs have been defined under Article 22(1) of the WTO Agreement on Trade -Related Aspects of 
Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS ) Agreement as: "Indications which identify a good as 
originating in the territory of a member, or a region or a locality in that territory, where a given

49 quality, reputation or characteristic of the good is essentially attributable to its geographic 
origin." 

The GI tag ensures that none other than those registered as authorised users (or at least those 
residing inside the geographic territory) are allowed to use the popular product name. Darjeeling 
tea became the first GI tagged product in India, in 2004 -05, 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement 2000 
Objectives of the scheme : 
Geographical Indications Registry is responsible for the administration of laws relating to 
Geographical Indication of Goods (Registration and Protection) Act, 1999. Geographical 
Indications of Goods are defined as that aspect of industrial property which refer to the 
geographical indication referring to a country or to a place situated therein as being the country 
or place of origin of that product. Typically, such a name conveys an assurance of quality and 
distinctiveness which is essentially attributable to the fact of its origin in that defined 
geographical locality, region or country. 

• Under Articles 1 (2) and 10 of the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, 
geographical indications are covered as an element of IPRs. 

• They are also covered under Articles 22 to 24 of the Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual 
Property Rights (TRIPS) Agreement, which was part of the Agreements concluding the 
Uruguay Round of GATT negotiations. 

• India, as a member of the World Trade Organization (WTO), enacted the Geographical 
Indications of Goods (Registration & Protection) Act, 1999 has come into force with effect 
from 15th September 2003. 

Benefits of Geographical Indication 

• It confers legal protection to Geographical Indications in India 

• Prevents unauthorised use of a Registered Geographical Indication by others 

• It provides legal protection to Indian Geographical Indications which in turn boost exports. 

• It promotes economic prosperity of producers of goods produced in a geographical territory. 

Funding Pattern

50 100% Central assistance. 

Eligibility 

• Any association of persons, producers, organisation or authority established by or under the 
law can apply: 

• The applicant must represent the interest of the producers 

• The application should be in writing in the prescribed form 

• The application should be addressed to the Registrar of Geographical Indications along with 
prescribed fee. 

Area of Operation 

All States and Union Territories. 

 
For detail Information visit: http://www.ipindia.nic.in/the -registration -process -gi.htm 

 

3.3 Name of Scheme: National Programme for Organic Production (NPOP) 

The National Programme for Organic Production provides for Standards for organic production, 
systems, criteria and procedure for accreditation of Certification Bodies, the National (India 
Organic) Logo and the regulations governing its use. The standards and procedures have been 
formulated in harmony with other International Standards regulating import and export of 
organic products. 

The National Programme for Organic Production shall, among others, include the following: 

(a) Policies for development and certification of organic products 

(b) National standards for organic products and processes 

(c) Accreditation of programmes to be operated by Inspection and Certification Agencies 

(d) Certification of organic products 
Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2001

51 Objectives of the scheme: 

(a) To provide the means of evaluation of certification programmes for organic agriculture and 
products as per the approved criteria. 

(b) To accredit certification programmes 

(c) To facilitate certification of organic products in conformity to the National Standards for 
Organic Products. 
(d) To encourage the development of organic farming and organic processing 

Salient features: 

The standards of Organic Crop Production have been described in Appendix 1 of Chapter 3 of 
NPOP document. The production standards include crop production plan, conversion 
requirement, nutrient management, disease management etc for agricultural crops. There are no 
separate prescribed production standards for pulses. 

Any agricultural product certified as organic under NPOP has to be certified by an accredited 
certification body under NPOP for exports. As per the inspection and certification procedures as 
prescribed under chapter 4 clause 4.3 of the National Programme for Organic Production 
(NPOP) Document, the Certification Bodies accredited under NPOP conduct inspection before 
certifying the operators as organic. After inspection and compliance to the requirement by the 
certified operators, certification decision is taken by the Certification Body and Scope Certificate 
is issued having a validity of one year. 

Organic products are traded only through issuance of Transaction Certificates (TCs) wherein the 
product identity and traceability is maintained. The TCs are also issued only by the accredited 
Certification Bodies. All the handlers of the product in the supply chain are required to be in the 
certification system under NPOP and need to obtain TC whenever the product is traded. 

As prescribed under NPOP Chapter 4, clause 4.3.1.4 under Analysis and Residue Testing, the 
testing is to be carried out in ISO 17025 accredited and preferably APEDA approved 
laboratories. 

Eligibility: Farmers, Processors, Traders and Exporters. 

Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: 
http://apeda.gov.in/apedawebsite/organic/ORGANIC_CONTENTS/National_Programme_for 
_Organic_Production.htm

52 3.4 Name of Scheme: Focus Product Scheme (FPS) 

EXIM (Export Import) Policy has introduced several measures to improve export turnover from 
the country. An important strategy on export promotion front is diversification of export basket 
and export market. This diversification will help to reduce risk of depending on few commodities 
and few markets. For diversifying the export basket or the type of commodities that are exported, 
Focus Product Scheme was introduced in 2006. 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2006 
Objectives of the scheme: 
The main objective of this scheme is to incentivize export of certain products, which have high 
employment intensity and other advantages. FPS aims to promote these products in the 
international Market. 

Salient features: As per the FPS policy, exports of notified products to all countries shall be 
entitled for duty credit scrip equivalent to 2 -5 % of the value of exports for each licensing year. 
Duty credit scrip is a license to import commodities in a duty free manner for the scrip value (2 - 
5% of exports). 

The products that come under FPS are notified from time to time and changes were introduced 
through EXIM policies. Exports of these notified products to all countries (and including SEZ 
units) are eligible for Duty Credit Scrip. As per the 2015 -20 Foreign Trade Policy, FPS was 
merged with MEIS. 

A Special Focus Product (s) was introduced to give Duty Credit Scrip of higher value (5%) to 
promote the export of difficult and important products. 

Eligibility: Exporters of select products to all countries 

Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: http://artismc.com/index.php/services/article/view/46/40/ 

 

3.5 Name of Scheme: Marketing Development Assistance (MDA) Scheme 

The Scheme now stands merged with the Market Access Initiative (MAI) Scheme. 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme

53 Year of Commencement: 2010 

Objectives of the scheme: 

Export promotion continues to be a major thrust area for the Government. In view of the 
prevailing macro economic situation with emphasis on exports and to facilitate various measures 
being undertaken to stimulate and diversify the country‟s export trade, Marketing Development 
Assistance (MDA) Scheme is under operation through the Department of Commerce to support 
the under mentioned activities: 

(i) Assist exporters for export promotion activities abroad 

(ii) Assist Export Promotion Councils (EPCs) to undertake export promotion activities for their 
product(s) and commodities 

(iii) Assist approved organizations/trade bodies in undertaking exclusive nonrecurring innovative 
activities connected with export promotion efforts for their members 

(iv) Assist Focus export promotion programmes in specific regions abroad like FOCUS (LAC), 
Focus (Africa), Focus (CIS) and Focus (ASEAN + 2) programmes. 
(v) Residual essential activities connected with marketing promotion efforts abroad. 

Salient features: 

Assistance to individual exporters for export promotion activities abroad – Participation in EPC 
etc. led Trade Delegations/BSMs/Trade Fairs/Exhibitions: 

(i) Exporting companies with an f.o.b. value of exports of upto Rs. 30 crore in the preceding 
year will be eligible for MDA assistance for participation in trade 
delegations/BSMs/fairs/exhibitions abroad to explore new markets for export of their specific 
product(s) and commodities from India in the initial phase. This will be subject to the condition 
that the exporter is having complete 12 months membership with concerned EPC etc. and filing 
of returns with concerned EPC/organisation regularly. However, this condition would not apply 
in case of a new EPC for a period of 5 years from the date of its creation. No such ceiling is 
applicable for participation in Focus LAC region . 

(ii) Assistance would be permissible on travel expenses by air, in economy excursion class fair 
and/or charges of the built up furnished stall. This would, however, be subject to an upper ceiling 
mentioned in the table per tour. 
Sl. No Area/Sector No. of visits 
eligible Maximum Financial ceiling per event 
1. Focus LAC 1 Rs. 2,50,000 
2. Focus Africa 1 Rs. 2,00,000

54 (Including WANA countries) 
3. Focus CIS 1 Rs. 2,00,000 
4. Focus ASEAN +2 1 Rs. 2,00,000 
5. General Areas 1 Rs. 1,50,000 
 TOTAL 5 
The participation of individual companies in the above activities shall be subject to the following 
conditions: 
(1) For EPC etc. led Trade Delegations/BSMs only air-fare by Economy Excursion class upto a 
maximum of Rs. 70,000 (Rs. 1,00,000 in case of Focus LAC) shall be permissible. For 
participation in Trade Fairs/Exhibitions reimbursement shall be permissible subject to ceilings 
mentioned in the column 4 in the above table. 

(2) Maximum number of permissible participations shall be five in a financial year as indicated 
in above table. 

However, for priority sectors, having large employment generation potential, viz. Agriculture 
including food items, Handicrafts, Handlooms, Carpets, Leather & Minor Forest Produce 
including LAC, 2 (two) participations in General Areas would be admissible with the assistance 
of Rs. 1,50,000 for each participation. The exporters availing of assistance under this provision 
would, however, be in addition to these participations, eligible for only any 2 Focus Area 
participations. 

(3) Assistance shall be permissible to one regular employee/director/partner/proprietor of the 
company. Assistance would not be available to exporter of foreign nationality or holding foreign 
passport. 

(4) Intimation application must be received in the concerned EPC etc. with a minimum of 14 
days clear advance notice excluding the date of receipt of application in the office of the 
concerned organization and the date of departure from the country. 

(5) The company shall not be under investigation/charged/prosecuted/debarred/black listed under 
the Foreign Trade Policy of India or any other law relating to export and import business. 

(6) Member exporters of EPCs etc. would also be eligible for MDA assistance for 
participation in events organized by ITPO abroad. Their applications/claims would by 
routed/reimbursed through concerned EPC etc . 

(7) Maximum MDA assistance shall be inclusive of MDA assistance received from all Govt. 
bodies/FIEO/EPCs/Commodity Boards/Export Development Authorities/ITPO etc., 

(8) A Maximum of three participations in a particular trade fair/exhibition would be eligible for 
MDA assistance and exporting companies after availing assistance three times including past

55 cases for a particular fair/exhibition, have to participate in that fair, if any, on self-financing 
basis. 

Documentation for Reimbursement of Assistance to Exporters: 

(i) Intimation application in Annexure IV duly completed and signed shall be submitted by the 
exporter to the concerned EPC etc. giving clear 14 days advance notice. Intimation and the 
application must be sent electronically by email also. 

(ii) Concerned Organization (FIEO, EPC etc.) on receipt of intimation shall immediately 
issue acknowledge receipt . Thereafter they will examine and issue approval letter to the 
exporter preferable within 5 working days of the receipt of the intimation, in the prescribed 
format (Annexure -V in link provided below ). 

(iii) Claim along with the declaration duly completed in the prescribed format ( Annexure -VI in 
link provided below) and the Certificate (Annexure VII in link provided below) duly signed by 
a Chartered Accountant shall be submitted by the exporter to the concerned Organization (FIEO, 
EEPC etc.) along with under mentioned papers immediately on return to India after completion 
of the activity but positively within 45 days of their return to India: 

• Details of activity undertaken earlier with MDA assistance to the same country/countries. 

• Legible photocopy of passport highlighting the entries about departure from and arrival 
into India and also the countries visited. In case, passport does not have arrival/departure 
dates regarding visits to various countries, some documentary evidence such as Hotel 
Bills, Boarding pass, lodging pass etc. be submitted. 

• Original air ticket/jacket used during the journey. If Original air ticket/jacket is lost, a 
legible photocopy of the same along with a certificate from the concerned airline 
indicating following may be sent: 
(a) Name of the traveler 
(b) Ticket number 
(c) Flight No. 
(d) Date of departure from India 
(e) Sectors/countries visited 
(f) Class in which traveled 
(g) Economy excursion class fare for sectors/countries visited. 

 
• Self certified f.o.b. value export figures during the last three financial years, year wise. 

• Brief report about the activity participated and achievements made.

56 (iv) Claim forms duly filled in and complete in all respects must be submitted to the concerned 
EPC, FIEO etc., within 90 days of return to India would. However, claims submitted within 30 
days from the expiry of the 90 days period may be entertained by or wherein the deficiencies in 
the claim as intimated by the concerned EPC, FIEO etc., with 10% deduction. The claims which 
are submitted after 120 days of return to India shall not be entertained under any circumstances. 
Any deficiencies in the claim as intimated by the concerned EPC, FIEO etc., must be completed 
within 30 days of the date of directions given in this regard failing which the claim shall stand 
rejected without any further intimation or reminder in this regard by the concerned EPC, FIEO 
etc. 

Eligibility: 

• Dept. of Central Government & Organisations of Central/State Governments; 

• EPCs; 

• Registered Trade Promotion Organisations; 

• Commodity Boards; 

• Apex Trade bodies recognised under EXIM Policy; 

• Recognised Industrial clusters; 

• Individual exporters 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

 

For detail Information visit: http://commerce.gov.in/writereaddata/trade/mda -guidelines01 -06- 
2013.pdf

57 Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 

 
4.1 Name of Scheme: Price Stabilization Fund (PSF) 

Prices of some of the horticulture commodities especially onion and potato are highly volatile. 
At the harvest time and soon thereafter, a steep fall in the wholesale and retail prices is normally 
observed. With depletion of the stored stocks, the prices tend to increase. This phenomenon is 
more apparent in the case of onions and potatoes. Price volatility affects consumers in a big way. 
Abnormal increase in price of these commodities affect the consumers by way of increase in 
food consumption budget. Wide price fluctuations also lead to speculation which further impact 
prices in retail market. To mitigate hardships to consumers, a new central sector scheme for 
providing working capital and other incidental expenses for procurement and distribution of 
perishable agri -horticultural commodities has been approved. For this purpose, a corpus – “Price 
Stabilisation Fund” is being created. The intervention is expected to regulate price volatility 
through procurement by State/ UT Government and Central agencies of selected produce, 
maintenance of buffer stocks and regulated release into the market. To begin with, interventions 
would be supported for onions and potatoes only. However, other commodities may be added 
later. 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2014 -15 
Objectives: 
To promote direct purchase from farmers /farmers‟ associations at farm gate/Mandi. To maintain 
a strategic buffer stock that would discourage hoarding and unscrupulous speculation. 

Structure of Scheme: 

It has been decided to create a corpus of Rs. 500 cr. for providing interest free advance towards 
working capital to eligible proposals from State Governments/Union Territories (UTs) and 
Central Agencies to enable procurement of perishable agri -horticulture produce. The fund shall 
be called “Corpus Fund for Procurement and Distribution of Identified Agri-Horticultural 
Commodities” (referred to as the Central Corpus Fund in this document). To begin with it will be 
used for Onion and Potato (“notified agri -horticultural commodities”). A separate savings bank 
account as “Corpus fund for procurement and distribution of perishable agri-horticultural 
commodities” shall be opened by Small Farmers Agri -Business Consortium (SFAC), which will 
act as Fund Manager, and the amount made available by the Government would be kept in this 
account. The account will be in a nationalised bank with flexi deposit facility. SFAC will also

58 maintain separate account of receipts and expenditure from the Central Corpus Fund, and will 
report to the Member Secretary, PSFMC. 

From the Central Corpus fund interest free working capital advance would be provided in two 
streams: 

Stream 1 - A onetime interest free advance to the States/UTs based on their first proposal for 
market intervention for price control, as evaluated by their State/UT Level Committee. This 
advance to the State Governments/UTs will, however, only be released into a revolving fund 
account set up for the purpose by the State Government/UT and to which the State 
Government/UT will contribute an equal amount. In case of North Eastern States, the Central 
advance will constitute 75% of the State/UT Corpus and contribution of NE States will be 25%. 

Stream 2 - Interest free advance to the Central agencies based on their proposal for market 
intervention for price control. This will be set up as a revolving fund. 

Eligibility: State Governments/Union Territories (UTs) and Central agencies 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

 

For detail Information visit: https://consumeraffairs.nic.in/sites/default/files/file - 
uploads/price_monitoring/PSF%20Operational%20Guidellines%20DOCA_0.pdf

59 Ministry of Culture 
5.1 Name of Scheme: Centre for Cultural Resources and Training (CCRT) 

The Centre for Cultural Resources and Training (CCRT) is a premier institution working towards 
culture with education. CCRT organizes variety of programmes to achieve specific objectives for 
enrichment of Indian educational system with the Cultural content. The CCRT has its 
headquarters in New Delhi and three Regional Centres at Udaipur in the west, Hyderabad in the 
south and Guwahati in the north -east to facilitate the widespread dissemination of Indian art and 
culture. 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 1979 
Objectives of the scheme: 
The main objective of CCRT is to revitalise the education system by creating an understanding 
and awareness among students about the plurality of the regional cultures of India and 
integrating this knowledge with education. 
One of its main activities is to conduct a variety of training programmes for in -service teachers 
drawn from all parts of the country. The training provides an understanding and appreciation of 
the philosophy, aesthetics and beauty inherent in Indian art and culture and focuses on 
formulating methodologies for incorporating a culture component, in curriculum teaching. 

Salient features: 

Organizes theoretical and theme based academic programmes on Indian art and culture for 
teachers and students. 

Conducts Workshops to provide practical training and knowledge in crafts to be incorporated in 
school curriculum. Various art activities like drama, music, narrative art forms, classical dances, 
etc. are organized to create an awareness of the regional variations and richness of cultural 
expressions of our country. 

Organizes various educational activities for school students, teachers and children belonging to 
governmental and non -governmental organizations under its Extension Services and Community 
Feedback Programme, to create an awareness of the need for conservation of the natural and 
cultural heritage.

60 Collects and develops a library of resources in the form of scripts, digital photographs, audio and 
video recordings and films with the objective of producing culturally -oriented educational aids to 
encourage the art and craft forms of rural India and their revival. 

Prepares publications and other audio -visual material which attempt to provide an understanding 
and appreciation of the different aspects of Indian art and culture. 

Implements Cultural Talent Search Scholarship Scheme for providing facilities to young talented 
children in the 10-14 age groups to study one or the other art form. 

The CCRT also implements some other important policies of the Ministry of Culture, e.g., 
awarding Scholarship to Young Artiste, Junior and Senior Fellowships focusing on "in -depth 
study/ research" in various facets of culture, these include New Emerging Areas of Cultural 
Studies. The CCRT has started organizing training programmes on arts management under 
NICHM Scheme, a new initiative of Ministry of Cultural, Govt. of India. The CCRT is also 
implementing Cultural Heritage Young Leadership Programme, aimed at promotion of social 
values and community engagement amongst the youth of the Country. 

Funding Pattern: 100% Central assistance. 

Eligibility: School and College students. 

Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories. 

For detail Information visit: http://ccrtindia.gov.in/aboutus.php 

 
5.2 Name of Scheme: National Culture Fund (NCF) 

The National Culture Fund was established by the Government of India (Ministry of Culture) in 
1996 as a trust under the Charitable Endowments Act 1890 managed by a Council chaired by the 
Hon‟ble Minister of Culture. The day to day affairs of the Fund are run by an Executive 
Committee headed by the Secretary, Ministry of Culture. 

NCF‟s primary mandate is to preserve and promote India‟s diverse cultural heritage through 
active involvement of the public and private sector. NCF‟s role is to draw the attention of the 
private and public sector to neglected areas of heritage and enable them to appreciate that 
cultural preservation is an essential part of the overall development of India and that by 
sponsoring projects in this field they will be assisting in the overall progress of the country. 

Though some large Public and Private Sectors are supporting heritage projects under their 
Corporate Social Responsibility, it has been felt that NCF should also provide financial support 
to some exceptional projects out of its own funds.

61 Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 1996 
Objectives of the scheme: 
• To support new and exceptional initiatives, that may not attract sufficient private funding. 
• To undertake studies and research on artistic, scientific and technical problems for the 
rehabilitation of cultural and natural heritage. 
• To promote oral and other intangible forms of cultural expression and recording 
documentation of forms that are dying out or are threatened with extension. 
• Support cultural projects that have positive sustainable, economic, social and 
environmental impact such as projects that create employment opportunities within the 
cultural sector, benefit the country, the community, especially the marginalized sections, 
women and the youth. 

Salient features: 

a) The projects to be considered under the Scheme should be with the maximum budget upto Rs. 
30 Lakhs for Tangible and Rs. 10 Lakh for Intangible heritage. 

b) The duration of the project should preferably be not more than 1 year, though for deserving 
and exceptional projects the duration could be extended at the discretion of the Project Selection 
Committee. 

Grant may be given to projects that support: - 

• Craft communities and create employment opportunities: 
• Heritage at Risk – Emergency restoration/ rehabilitation of heritage (tangible and living) in 
areas that have been subjected to natural and human induced disasters /calamities. 
• Advocacy and Outreach for threatened art forms 
• Community Engagement – Opportunities for communities to build support for heritage 
protection and knowledge systems existing within that community. 
• Part Funding for Larger Projects: - The ratio of the NCF: Donor contribution to projects 
under this Fund will not exceed 1:2. The maximum amount to be provided by NCF for a 
project will not exceed Rs. 30 lakhs. 

Funding Pattern: 100% Central Grant 

Eligibility: Any State Government or voluntary organisation with a known record of service in 
the field of art and culture and registered under the Societies Registration Act 1860 (21 of 1860) 
or registered as a Public Trust at least for the last two years will be eligible for applying for 
financial assistance from the NCF for a specific project.

62 Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories. 

For detail Information visit: http://ncf.nic.in/about -us.html 

 

 
5.3 Name of Scheme: Guru Shishya Parampara Scheme 
Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2003 -04 

Objectives of the scheme: 

Department of Culture, Government of India, launched a Scheme called ‘Guru Shishya 
Parampara Scheme’ through Zonal Cultural Centre to preserve and promote rare and vanishing 
art forms whether classical or folk/tribal so that the young talents be nurtured to acquire skills in 
their chosen field of art through some financial assistance by the ZCCs in the form of scholarship 
under the guidance of Experts and Masters in these fields. This scheme has provided security to a 
large number of old and retired artistes. Most of the artistes covered under this scheme are from 
rural areas and teaching shishyas from within reasonable catchment area of their residence. 

Salient features: 

To implement this scheme, Great Masters (Gurus) of different art forms of different ZCC, who 
are capable to train the interested shishyas are identified. Each Guru is expected to train five to 
eight shishyas. To motivate and incentize, a small scholarship is provided to the pupil and an 
honorarium to the Master(Guru) as per the norms fixed by Ministry of Culture, Government of 
India which are as under: 

Guru (Master) @ Rs.5000/ - per month 
Accompanist @ Rs.2500/ - each per month 
Shishya @ Rs.1000/ - each per month 
Funding Pattern: 100% Central assistance. 
Eligibility: Student of classical or traditional folk/tribal art. 

Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories

63 For detail Information visit: http://www.culturenorthindia.com/guru -shishya -parampara - 
master -to-pupil -tradition -scheme/# 

 

 
5.4 Name of Scheme: Young Talented Artistes Scheme 

The Scheme of award to Young Talented Artistes is being implemented by Ministry of Culture, 
Government of India through Zonal Cultural Centres to promote the young talented artistes in the 
age group of 18 -31 years in the field of various folk art forms which are rare and at the verge of 
extinct. 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2004 -05 
Objectives of the scheme: 
The main aim of this scheme is to recognize & encourage Young Talented Artists in various 
performing/ folk Art forms of the region. Under this scheme, competitions in various 
performing/ folk art forms by involving young talented artistes are organized and awards are 
given to the winners. 

Salient features: 

As per the scheme 20 young talented artists in every cultural zone will be selected and awarded 
with a cash prize of upto Rs.10,000 per artists. 

Funding Pattern: 100% Central assistance. 

Eligibility: Young talented artists in various performing/ folk Art forms. 

Area of Operation : In every cultural zone. 

For detail Information visit: http://www.culturenorthindia.com/young -talent -artists -award - 
scheme/

64 5.5 Name of Scheme: Cultural Function and Production Grant Scheme (CFPGS) 
Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2013 -14 

Objectives of the scheme: 

The Scheme covers all „not -for-profit‟ organizations, NGOs, Societies, Trusts, Universities and 
individual for supporting the Seminars, Conference, Research, Workshops, Festivals, 
Exhibitions, Symposia, Production of Dance, Drama -Theatre, Music etc. and small research 
projects on different aspects of Indian Culture. 
The scheme will, however, not be applicable to such organizations or institutions which are 
functioning as religious institutions, or as schools/colleges. The Scheme is not meant for 
College/University Festivals. 

Salient features: 
The Organization should have been functioning and registered under the Societies Registration 
Act (XXI of 1860), Trusts Act, Companies Act or any Central or State Act for at least three 
years. For individual applying for financial assistance under the Scheme there is no such 
requirement. 
Grant will be provided for all types of interactive fora such as conferences, seminars, workshops, 
symposia, festivals and exhibitions, production on any subject important to the preservation or 
promotion of cultural heritage, arts, letters and other creative endeavors. 

 
Funding Pattern: Financial assistance may be given for the following purposes: 

Holding of Conference, Seminars, Workshops, Symposia, Festivals, Exhibitions, Production of 
Dance, Drama -Theatre, Music etc. and undertaking small research projects, etc. on any art 
forms/important cultural matters. 

To meet expenditure on activities of development nature like conduct of surveys, pilot projects, 
etc. on cultural subjects including publications thereof. 

Grant for specific projects shall be restricted to 75% of the expenditure, subject to a maximum of 
Rs.5.00 lakhs per project as recommended by the Expert Committee. 

The Ministry may in exceptional circumstances, increase the assistance to any project of 
outstanding merit and relevance upto Rs. 20 Lakhs with the approval of Hon‟ble Minister of 
Culture.

65 The Grant will be released in two installments of 75% (First Installment) and 25% (Second 
Installment). 

Eligibility: 

(a) The applicant organization that are voluntary organizations or NGOs, should, in order to 
qualify for the grant, have a properly constituted managing body with its powers, duties 
and responsibilities clearly defined and laid down in the form of a written constitution. 
This is not applicable in respect of individual. 

(b) The Organization/individual must have tied up or planned the matching resources at least 
to the extent of 25 % of the project cost. 

(c) The Organization/individual should have facilities, resources, personnel and experience 
to take up the event/ project for which a grant is required. 

(d) Past experience of holding such functions, as applied for, would be given preference. 

Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: 
http://www.indiaculture.nic.in/sites/default/files/Schemes/CFPG_Latest_Guidelines_03_05_20 
19.pdf 

 

 
5.6 Name of Scheme: Seva Bhoj Yojna 

This is a Central Sector Scheme for providing reimbursement of CGST and Central 
Government‟s share of IGST paid by charitable/religious institutions on purchase of specific raw 
food items for serving free food to public / devotees. The scheme shall be applicable only to such 
institutions which are eligible under the Scheme. 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2018 
Objectives: 
Under the Scheme of „Seva Bhoj Yojna‟ Central Goods and Services Tax (CGST) and Central 
Government‟s share of Integrated Goods and Services Tax (IGST) paid on purchase of specific

66 raw food items by Charitable/Religious Institutions for distributing free food to public shall be 
reimbursed as Financial Assistance by the Government of India. 

Salient features : 

Type of Activities Supported Under the Scheme: 

Free „prasad‟ or free food or free „langar‟ / „bhandara‟ (community kitchen) offered by 
charitable/religious institutions like Gurudwara, Temples, Dharmik Ashram, Mosques, Dargah, 
Church, Math, Monasteries etc. Financial Assistance will be provided on First -cum-First Serve 
basis of registration linked to fund available for the purpose in a Financial Year. 

Financial Assistance in the form of reimbursement shall be provided where the institution has 
already paid GST on all or any of the raw food items listed below: i) Ghee ii) Edible oil iii) 
Sugar / Burra / Jaggery iv) Rice v) Atta / Maida / Rava /Flour vi) Pulses. 

The total amount of CGST and Central Government‟s share of IGST that would be reimbursed 
on purchases in the Financial Year 2019 -20 will be capped at a maximum of 10% of the current 
financial year i.e. 2018 -19. 

Funding Pattern : 

Criteria for Financial Assistance: i) A Public Trust or society or body corporate, or 
organisation or institution covered under the provisions of section 10 (23BBA) of the Income 
Tax Act, 1961 (as amended from time to time) or registered under the provisions of section 
12AA of the Income Tax Act, 1961, for charitable/religious purposes, or a company formed and 
registered under the provisions of section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013 or section 25 of the 
Companies Act, 1956, as the case may be, for charitable/ religious purposes, or a Public Trust 
registered as such forcharitable/religious purposes under any Law for the time being in force, or 
a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, for charitable/religious purposes. 
ii) The applicant Public Trust or society or body corporate, or organisation or institution, as the 
case may be, must be involved in charitable/religious activities by way of free and philanthropic 
distribution of food/prasad/langar(Community Kitchen)/ bhandara free of cost and without 
discrimination through the modus of public, charitable/religious trusts or endowments including 
maths, temples, gurdwaras, wakfs, churches, synagogues, agiaries or other places of public 
religious worship. iii) The institutions/organizations should have been in existence for 
precedingthree years before applying for assistance. iv) Only those institutions would be eligible 
for financial assistance which have been distributing free food, langar and prasad to public for at - 
least past three years on the day of application. For this purpose, entities shall furnish a self - 
certificate. v) Financial Assistance under the scheme shall be given only to those institutions 
which are not in receipt any Financial Assistance from the Central/State Government for the 
purpose of distributing free food: self- certificate vi) The institutions shall serve free food to at

67 least 5000 people in a calendar month. vii) The Institution/Organization blacklisted under the 
provisions of Foreign Contribution Regulation Act (FCRA) or under the provisions of any 
Act/Rules of the Central/State Government shall not be eligible for Financial Assistance under 
the Scheme. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: 
http://www.indiaculture.nic.in/sites/default/files/Schemes/RevisedGuidelinesforSevaBhojYojn 
a_31.08.2018.pdf

68 Ministry for Development of North Eastern Region 

6.1 Name of Scheme: North East Special Infrastructure Development Schemes (NESIDS) 

The new Central scheme of North East Special Infrastructure Development Schemes (NESIDS), 
fully funded by the Government of India, is taken up to fill up gaps of infrastructure in certain 
identified sectors of the Region. The NESIDS will accord focus on exploitation of the huge 
tourism potential of the area by way of strengthening related infrastructure and will also give 
emphasis on creation of infrastructure of social sectors like health and education. 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 

Year of Commencement: 2017 

Objectives: The broad objective of NESIDS is to ensure focused development of North East 
Region by providing financial assistance for projects of (a) physical infrastructure relating to 
water supply, power, connectivity and specially the projects promoting tourism and (b) social 
sector for creation of infrastructure in the areas of primary and secondary sectors of education 
and health. The NESIDS will be over and above the existing schemes of Government of India 
and State Governments of the NE Region. Only those projects would be considered for funding 
under the scheme which is not supported under any other scheme of Central or State 
Government. 

Funding Pattern : The funds under NESIDS will be allocated to States on the basis of 
Normative Allocation in the beginning of the Financial Year. However, funds will be provided 
for the ongoing projects under NLCPR so that they are completed by 2019 -20. 

If any of the States are not in a position to absorb the funds, their allocations may be diverted to 
better performing States. 

Area of Operation: States in North Eastern Region 

For detail Information visit: 
https://mdoner.gov.in/contentimages/files/NESIDS_Guidelines.pdf

69 North Eastern Council 

 
6.2.1. Name of Scheme: Schemes of the North Eastern Council 

The “Schemes of the NEC” is a Central Sector Scheme on 100% funding by Government of 
India and supports projects in selective and focussed sectors of the eight NE states as below: 
i. Bamboo sector: In order to realise the potential of turning bamboo into green gold in 
the NER, NEC would support multi -sectoral interventions covering the entire value 
chain including support to regional centres of excellence including strengthening of 
state, regional level and national level institutions located in NER. 
ii. Piggery: Value chain development of piggery right from setting up of swine flu 
vaccine plants to proposed processing and packaging, meeting locally unmet internal 
consumption demand and ultimately export to neighbouring countries of ASEAN and 
China. 
iii. Regional Tourism: Promotion of theme based regional tourism circuit. Support would 
be provided for completion of infrastructure projects under PIDDC Scheme of M/o 
Tourism where substantial work (more than 50%) has been accomplished. 
iv. Higher Education, Tertiary Healthcare (including Health Education) & special 
interventions in backward areas as follows: 
a. Support to augment infrastructure of higher education including hostels etc. 
b. Support to tertiary healthcare (including medical education), both State Centre, in 
NER to cater to the need of the region which would in turn attract both education 
and medical tourists from other parts of the country and neighbouring countries; 
c. Special interventions in the Sixth schedule areas; backward districts and militancy 
affected districts & Autonomous Council Areas, in the form of creation of 
supports and infrastructure, training of teachers of science and mathematics; 
d. Telemedicine in above areas; and 
e. Educational interventions through remote media like satellite TV, digital and 
other media. 
v. Livelihood Projects: Interventions throughout the value chain in other sectors which 
are local strengths of NER having great potential of augmenting livelihood 
employment generation and augmenting incomes and capture the entire value chain 
from production till processing and packaging in areas like (a) Floriculture; (b) 
Medicinal and Aromatic plants (c) Bee-keeping (d) Poultry (e) Fishery (f) Handloom 
(g) Handicraft and (h) Horticulture/Agri -Allied could also be taken up. 
vi. Science and Technology interventions in the NER (STINER) including use of remote 
sensing applications for planning and project monitoring; popularisation of ICT uses 
and innovation for livelihoods; setting up of Technology Facilitation Centres (TFCs)

70 with focus on appropriate technological interventions for farm, nonfarm and other 
sectors across NER; Early Warning System (EWS) for disaster mitigation including 
use of space technology. 
vii. Surveys & Investigations: Support for undertaking surveys and investigation and 
preparation of DPR for various infrastructure projects including hydro -electric power, 
flood management, irrigation, soil erosion etc. 
viii. Promotion of the North Eastern Region: Setting up of Centres for awareness 
generation, advocacy and promotion of NEC; creating networks with Centres of 
Excellence on priority across sectors throughout the country; augmenting of the 
Regional Documentation Centre as a move towards making NEC into a State of the 
Art Resource Centre. 

 
For detail Information visit: 
http://necouncil.gov.in/sites/default/files/NEC%20General%20Guidelines_2020.pdf 

 

 
6.2.2. Name of Scheme: Guidelines for selecting proposals under head for Promotion of 
North Eastern Region [para 2.6 (viii) of NEC General Guidelines 2020] 

1. Proposals eligible for funding: 

Proposals that promote the comparative strengths and potential of the NER can be taken up 
such as: 

i. Road shows and pilot projects to promote, advocate and publicise good practices 
in the priority areas identified by the NEC viz: Bamboo sector, Regional 
Tourism, Livelihoods, Organic NER, Handloom, Handicrafts & Horticulture, 
Clean& Green NER, Food Processing and Entrepreneurship or any other priority 
fixed by the NEC from time to time. 

ii. Dissemination and advocacy of information/education on various Govt. 
programs using ICT and mobile technology with a greater focus on innovations 
and initiatives designed to benefit relatively more remote, deprived areas and 
disadvantaged sections of society in NER. 

iii. Business Summits, Conventions, Seminars, Workshops, Consultations, 
Brainstorming meetings, Exhibitions etc. in domains connected to 
developmental priorities of the North Eastern Region.

71 iv. Specialised media campaigns on themes concerning NER like organic farming, 
cleanliness (Swachata), bamboo etc. 

v. Web Presence and Media. presence of the NEC and potential of NER 
including social media 

vi. Evaluations/ Impact Studies/assessments related to development/ promotion of 
NE Region. 

3. Eligibility norms 

i. Ministries of GoI 

ii. PSUs of MDoNER 

iii. Central universities and colleges there -under (as listed in MoHRD) 

iv. NE State universities / deemed universities (as listed in MoHRD) 

v. Government Institutions of National importance (e.g. IITs/IIMs/BARC). 

vi. Proposals of Traditional Institutions, Autonomous Bodies, eligiblenon -government 
bodies registered on NGO - Darpan web site of NITI Aayog, provided the same are 
recommended by the Planning Department of the concerned state or through the 
concerned Central Ministries 

4 Submission of proposals 

(i) Proposals will be submitted in prescribed format (ANNEXURES I, II & 
III). 

(ii) Director (IPR) in the NEC would be in -charge of Advocacy & Publicity 
and will examine and process all proposals for consideration of the 
Screening Committee of Advocacy & Publicity before taking the final 
approval of the competent authority. The Screening Committee meeting 
will be held on a monthly basis (as far as possible). 

5. Administration of Promotion Activities 

5.1 All proposals shall be examined by the concerned division before they are placed before 
the Screening Committee. The Screening Committee shall have the following members: 

 
i) Planning Adviser Chairman

72 ii) Economic Adviser (E&M) Member 
iii) Representative of Financial Adviser Member 
iv) All Sectoral Heads in the NEC Members 
v) Director (IPR) NEC Member Secretary 

 
Representative(s) of the organizations that seek financial assistance or are concerned with the 
subject may be invited to these meetings. 

5.2 The Committee shall decide the quantum of financial assistance, timing and duration of the 
programme and other parameters concerning the proposal and recommend accordingly for 
sanction. No sanction shall issue without the recommendation of the Committee. 

5.3 For clearer scrutiny and vetting of proposals, the following steps will be kept, in view: 

i. The Organisation should follow the General Financial Rule 2017 and its subsequent 
amendments/instructions/orders etc. issued time to time by the Government of India 
while disbursement of funds released as Grants -in-Aid. 

ii. TA/DA Accommodation for non -officials (artisans/farmers) participating in events at our 
invitation: Ordinarily, the lowest class entitled for Central Government employees (for 
farmers/artisans). However, for Shilp Gurus or any persons who have been 
awarded/recognized for their works and extraordinary circumstances/exceptions prior 
permission from competent authority will be obtained on case to case basis. 

iii. Local Conveyance: FR /SR of GOI will be applicable. For groupparticipants, bus / van 
will be hired. Approval of competent authority may be sought with justification for 
exceptions if any. 

iv. Stalls / exhibition space: Rent shall be paid at not more than ITPO rates (i.e. ITPO basic 
space rates). Approval of competent authority may be sought with justification for 
exceptions if any. 

v. All Bills/Vouchers should be GST paid. 

vi. The concerned authorised and registered CA must certify (countersigned by the HoD) 
that the A&P Guidelines have been followed. Consolidated and duly certified/stamped 
bill statements only need to be attached and not each and every bill in original. However, 
Ministry / NEC may asked for original bills in special circumstances. 

vii. All payments will be paid through EAT Module of PFMS.

73 5.4 Release of Advertisements/ Campaigns etc. 

i. Release of advertisements in print/electronic media and other media related issues 
would be governed by the provisions of the extant rules, issued by Directorate of 
Advocacy and Visual Publicity, Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, Government 
of India and in no case should be contravened. 

ii. An outcome report specifying the targets of the project / programme and achievements 
in financial and physical prospective should be submitted after each event. 

5.5 Projects recommended by the Committee shall be put up for concurrence of Financial 
Adviser before obtaining the approval of the Secretary NEC. 

6. Financial Parameters 

6.1 Ceilings of financial assistance: The amount of financial assistance for various programmes 
would be normally as under: 

Sl. No Progamme Financial Ceiling 
1. Workshop 

Rs10 lakh 2. Business Summit/ Road shows 
3. Convention 
4. Seminar/ Symposium 
5. Evaluations/ Impact Studies/ Assessments/ Other 
Advocacy related works relevant to NER Rs 20 lakh 
6.2 In the case of theme based Media Campaigns (e.g. Swachhta Abhiyan, etc.), release of funds 
would be subject to the Terms and Conditions of the specific campaign, subject to DAVP 
Guidelines. 

6.3. Release of second and subsequent installments shall depend upon review of the progress/ 
acceptable quality of the project by the concerned division. 

 
For detail Information visit: 
http://necouncil.gov.in/sites/default/files/NEC%20General%20Guidelines_2020.pdf

74 6.2.3. Name of Scheme: North East Road Sector Development Scheme (NERSDS) 
Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 
Objectives: 

The objective of the North East Road sector Development Scheme (NERSDS) is to take up 
rehabilitation/construction/upgradation of the following category of roads (including bridges on 
the roads) in the North Eastern Region (NER) in order of priority: (i) Inter -state roads previously 
built by the North Eastern Council (NEC) and other agencies which are of vital connectivity for 
one state, but of little importance for the other state and hence remained neglected, but with 
available formation width of roads; (ii) roads in socio -politically neglected pockets of NER; (iii) 
roads required for security or strategic viewpoint, not covered in any other programmes; and (iv) 
roads necessary from the viewpoint of market access for agriculture produce and roads of 
economic importance on gap filling approach. 

Salient features : 

The Scheme will be administered and monitored in the Ministry of DoNER through an 
Empowered Inter -Ministerial Committee under chairmanship of Secretary, DoNER. The 
Committee will screen, appraise and recommend project proposals for implementation by 
appropriate agency and also monitor progress of sanctioned projects. The Empowered 
InterMinisterial Committee comprise of the following: i) Secretary, Ministry of DoNER Chair ii) 
Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport & Highways or his representative not below the rank of 
Joint Secretary Member iii) Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs or his representative not below 
the rank of Joint Secretary Member iv) Secretary, Department Expenditure, Ministry of Finance 
or his representative not below the rank of Joint Secretary Member v) Secretary, North Eastern 
Council Member vi) Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser, DoNER Member vii) Joint Secretary, 
DoNER in charge of NERSDS Member Secretary 

Formulation, appraisal and approval of Projects under NERSDS 

The following process shall be adopted for projects formulation: (a) Projects as well as the 
appropriate implementing agency will be identified by the empowered committee. The identified 
implementing agency will prepare the estimates for pre -construction activities and the detailed 
project report. (b) Projects taken up under NERSDS will include 4 -year maintenance clause with 
the capital cost of the project. (c) Alternative road construction technologies such as WMM and 
even PCC will be encouraged so as to ensure lesser maintenance needs and long life. (d) Once 
the DPR is prepared along with implementation timeframe, the implementing agency will submit 
the detailed proposal to the Ministry for placing before the empowered Committee. (e) The 
Committee will recommend the implementation timeframe for the project and the physical and 
financial milestones.

75 Release of funds 

The Ministry of DoNER will release funds through authorization to the concerned Central 
Ministry/Department to which the implementing agency is affiliated. The empowered Inter - 
Ministerial Committee may recommend the quantum and manner in which the initial financial 
release may be made for the recommended project/work. Once the pre -construction activities are 
completed and the Committee decided the physical and financial milestones, subsequent release 
of funds will be made by the Ministry based on the requirement and 3 availability of funds. 
Maintenance component of the project cost will be released only after physical completion of the 
work and releases will be on annual basis. 

Area of Operation: All North Eastern States 

For detail Information visit: https://mdoner.gov.in/dashboard/files/NERSDS.pdf 

 

6.2.4. Name of Scheme: Financial Support to the Students of N.E.R for Higher Professional 
Courses 
These scholarships are available for studies in India only and shall be awarded by the North 
Eastern Council, Ministry of Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region, Government of 
India, Shillong to the eligible candidates of the North Eastern States. 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 

Year of Commencement: 2020 

Objectives: 
Grant of NEC Merit Scholarship to the students of the North East (NE) Region undergoing 
studies in different disciplines at different levels in Institutions inside as well as outside the 
North -East but within the country 

Salient features : 
The merit lists will be drawn from among finally verified applications as per the scheme 
guidelines and after following the laid down procedure on the NSP. Selection of students for M. 
Phil and Ph. D. will be done on the basis of topic of research/Synopsis which has relevance to the 
problems/issues related to NE Region. The Subjects/topics for M.Phil and Ph.D should 
invariably be directly, specifically and currently relevant to NE Region. Basic and theoretical 
research shall not be favored in general. The scholarship is purely on merit basis. The merit list 
will be prepared exclusively on the basis of marks obtained by the candidate in the qualifying 
exams and complying with the level -of-course -wise slots allotted to the states as mentioned in 
the table below. In case of tie, preference shall be given to the candidate having lesser family

76 income. There will not be any reservation/quota on the basis of category/religion/gender. In case 
the allotted quota as mentioned in the table below remains unfilled for want of eligible 
candidates, the same may be distributed to remaining eligible students from other NE States, as 
per their inter se merit list. The scholarships will be disbursed to selected students by NEC 
directly in their provided and verified bank accounts using DBT mode as per the extant 
guidelines. 

Other Conditions under the Scheme: 
The rates of scholarships are subject to revision from time to time. As and when need arises for 
such revision a Committee will be appointed by the Secretary, NEC for the purpose. The present 
rate of scholarship for related Subjects/Courses at different levels is as under: 
Level of Study Scholarship amount for fresh and renewal cases (existing 
students) 
Diploma 20,000/ -p.a. 
Degree 22,000/ - p.a. 
Post graduate 25,000/ - p.a. 
M. Phil./Ph D 30,000/ - p.a. 

 
The number of Fresh Scholarships to be awarded every year to candidates of different NER 
states at different levels may be as follows: 
Sl.No State Diploma Degree PG Degree M.Phil / PhD Total 
1. Arunachal Pradesh 20 130 52 7 209 
2. Assam 30 200 80 10 320 
3. Manipur 18 120 48 6 192 
4. Meghalaya 18 120 48 6 192 
5. Mizoram 18 120 48 6 192 
6. Nagaland 18 120 48 6 192 
7. Sikkim 10 70 28 3 111 
8. Tripura 18 120 48 6 192 
 Total 150 1000 400 50 1600 

NEC may increase or decrease the total numbers of scholarships subject to availability of 
fund/allocation of budget from time to time. However, the numbers would be fixed as per the 
normative allocation accepted for different NE states. 

Eligibility : 

The scholarship is open only to a student who is a permanent resident of any of the North Eastern 
States. For candidates belonging to Academic Year 2020 -21 and onwards, the scholarship under 
this scheme shall be disbursed only through National Scholarship Portal (NSP). However, the 
students, who already have been receiving scholarship before these rules coming into force, shall

77 continue to receive their scholarships as per the prevailing procedure till end of their scholarships 
tenure. Once selected, the scholarship shall be available to a selected student for the prescribed 
duration of a course subject to fulfillment of renewal conditions, as specified under Para 6 of 
these rules. Extension of scholarship beyond the prescribed period of study will not be 
entertained. At the time of availing the scholarship, the student must not be in receipt of any 
other scholarship/financial assistance from any other source. A sponsored candidate under full 
employment during the period of study or working/in -service candidates shall not be eligible to 
receive the scholarship. A student shall only be considered for scholarship in the year of 
commencement of his/her course. For subsequent year of course, only renewal will be allowed. 
Scholarship shall be admissible to students who get admission in Diploma, Degree, Post- 
graduate or registration in M.Phil. / Ph.D courses of any institute recognized by the Government. 
The grant of scholarship for M.Phil and Ph.D would be after the registration of the students with 
the University. The Scholarship will not be available for internship or any practical training. The 
scholarship shall be admissible to the students whose parent / guardian‟s annual income from all 
sources shall not exceed Rs 8.0 lakh. The income certificate issued by the competent authority 
shall be furnished by the candidate. The student must fulfill the following eligibility criteria in 
the previous qualifying examination for consideration of scholarship: 
Level Qualifying examination 
Diploma HSLC/HSSLC/Secondary School Leaving /Senior Secondary Leaving 
certificate examination from a recognized State/Central board with 
minimum 60% marks in aggregate 
Degree HSSLC/Senior Secondary Leaving certificate examination from a 
recognized State/Central board with minimum 60% marks in 
aggregate 
Post Graduate Degree level examination in any discipline (BA/BSc/BE/B 
Tech/MBBS/LLB/BCA/BBA etc. of any recognized Institute/ 
University with minimum 60% marks in aggregate 
M.Phil./Ph.D PG degree from any recognized University with minimum 60% marks 
in aggregate 

 
Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

 

For detail Information visit: 
http://necouncil.gov.in/sites/default/files/uploadfiles/NEC%20NSP%20Guidelines%20%26%2 
0notification%20%20publishing%20SC.pdf

78 Ministry of Jal Shakti 

 
7.1 Name of Scheme: Nirmal Gram Puraskar 

Government of India (GOI) has been promoting sanitation coverage in a campaign mode to 
ensure better health and quality of life for people in rural India. To add vigour to its 
implementation, GOI launched an award based Incentive Scheme for fully sanitized and open 
defecation free Gram Panchayats, Blocks, Districts and States called "Nirmal Gram Puraskar" 
(NGP) in October 2003 and gave away the first awards in 2005 as a component of its flagship 
scheme Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC). NGP awards have been given till the year 2011. NGP 
seeks to recognise the efforts made by Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRls) and organisations 
which have contributed significantly towards ensuring full sanitation coverage in their areas of 
operation. Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan (NBA) lays strong emphasis on Information, Education and 
Communication (IEC), capacity building and hygiene education for effective behaviour change 
covering the entire community for saturated outcomes with a view to create Nirmal Gram 
Panchayats with the involvement of PRls, Community Based Organizations (CBOs), Non- 
Governmental Organizations (NGOs), etc. 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2003 
Objectives of the scheme: 
1. To promote safe sanitation and clean environment as a way of life in rural India 

2. To incentivise Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRls) to make the villages Open Defecation Free 
(ODF) and to adopt Solid and Liquid Waste Management (SLWM). 
3. To sustain the initiative of clean environment. 

4. To encourage organizations to play a catalytic role in social mobilization in the 
implementation of NBA. 

Salient features: 

Upon receipt of the application, the Gram Panchayats are also examined for achievements under 
the following activities: 

• Coverage of Individual Household Latrine (IHHL) 

• Coverage of School Sanitation

79 • Coverage of Anganwadi Sanitation 

• Access to adequate water as per National Rural Drinking Water Program (NRDWP) 
Guidelines 

• Activities under Information, Education and Communication. 

• Activities under Solid Waste Management 

• Activities under Liquid Waste Management 

Structure of Scheme: 

Nirmal Gram Puraskar till 2011 was given by Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation 
(MoDWS), Government of India at all levels of PRls that is Gram Panchayat, Block Panchayat 
and district Panchayat. It has now been decided that with the transition to NBA, selection of 
Gram Panchayats to award Nirmal Gram Puraskar from the year 2012 shall be taken up by the 
States, while selection of the Blocks and District Panchayats shall continue to be with the 
Centre. These guidelines have accordingly been formulated. 

Funding Pattern: 

Fund sharing pattern of 80:20 between Centre and State will be adopted for NGP award money. 
The total award money will be released to the GPs in the following mode: 

• 25% of the award money to be released in cash on declaration of award. 
• 75% of the award money to be kept as a fixed deposit for two years in the GP's name. 

Award Money is offered only to PRls while Officials and Organisations are given citations 
and mementos in recognition of their efforts. Award Money to GPs is offered based on 
population criterion, which is given in the table below. 

based on population criterion, which is given in the table below. 

 

Criteria/ Amount Gram Panchayat 
Population as per 
Census 2011 Less than 
1000 1000 to 1999 2000 to 4999 5000 to 9999 10,000 and 
above 
Award Money 
(Rs in Lakh) 0.5 1.0 2.0 4.0 5.0

80 Eligibility: A Gram Panchayat will be eligible to apply for the NGP on the following grounds: 

Gram Panchayat has adopted a resolution to ban open defecation within its entire area inclusive 
of all habitations and villages. All habitations within the Gram Panchayat jurisdiction have 
access to water for drinking and sanitation purposes. The Gram Panchayat has achieved 
objectives for all components as approved in the District Project and entered it in the IMIS of the 
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation. 

Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: http://www.indiaenvironmentportal.org.in/files/ngp - 
guidelines.pdf 

 
7.2 Name of Scheme: Swachh Bharat Mission Gramin 

To accelerate the efforts to achieve universal sanitation coverage and to put focus on sanitation, 
the Prime Minister of India launched the Swachh Bharat Mission on 2nd October, 2014. In Rural 
India, this would mean improving the levels of cleanliness through Solid and Liquid Waste 
Management activities and making villages Open Defecation Free (ODF), clean and sanitised. 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2014 
Objectives: 
To bring about an improvement in the general quality of life in the rural areas, by promoting 
cleanliness, hygiene and eliminating open defecation. 

To accelerate sanitation coverage in rural areas to achieve the vision of Swachh Bharat by 2nd 
October 2019. 
To motivate communities to adopt sustainable sanitation practices and facilities through 
awareness creation and health education. 

To encourage cost effective and appropriate technologies for ecologically safe and sustainable 
sanitation. 

To develop, wherever required, community managed sanitation systems focusing on scientific 
Solid & Liquid Waste Management systems for overall cleanliness in the rural areas.

81 To create significant positive impact on gender and promote social inclusion by improving 
sanitation especially in marginalized communities 

Salient features: 

The main activities covered under Swachh Bharat Mission are: 

• Construction of Individual Household Latrines (IHHL) 
• Construction of Community Sanitary Complexes (CSCs). 
• Solid Liquid Waste Management (SLWM) activities. 
• Information, Education and Communication (IEC) and Human Resource Development 
(HRD) activities. 

Funding Pattern: 

SBM(G) Component -Wise earmarking and funding pattern: 
Sl. 
No. Component Amount earmarked 
as percent of 
the SBM(G) project 
outlay Contribution Share 
GOI State Beneficiary 
Household/ 
Community 
1 IEC, Start Up 
Activity and 
Capacity 
Building Up to 8% of total 
project cost, with 3% 
to be utilized at the 
Central level and 5% 
at State level. 60% 40% 0% 
2 Revolving Fund Up to 5% 60% 40% 0% 
3 (I) Individual 
Household 
Latrines Actual amount 
required for full 
coverage Rs. 7200 
(60%) (Rs.10,800) 
(90%) in case of NE 
States, MK and 
Special category 
States ) Rs. 4800 
(40%) 
(Rs. 1,200) 
(10%) in case of 
NE States, J&K 
and Special 
category States ) 0% 
4 (ii) Community 
Sanitary 
Complexes Actual amount 
required for full 
coverage 60% 30% 10% 
5 Administrative 
charges Up to 2% of the 
project cost 60% 40% 0% 
6 Solid/Liquid 
Waste 
Management 
(Capital Cost) Actual amount as per 
SLWM project cost 
within limits 
permitted 60% 40% 0% 
No additional funding from any other Centrally Sponsored Scheme will be permitted.

82 Eligibility: Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: 
http://swachhbharatmission.gov.in/sbmcms/writereaddata/images/pdf/Guidelines/Complete -set- 
guidelines.pdf 

 

7.3 Name of Scheme: Swajal 

Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation has launched „Swajal‟, a simple and flexible drinking 
water supply scheme, targeting unreached habitations from 117 aspirational districts. In 
aspirational districts the piped water supply coverage is 25% which is less than national average. 
Swajal is a mini piped water supply scheme easy for community to construct, operate and 
maintain. The core concept of Swajal is enabling community to choose its own pipe water supply 
option which is socially acceptable, economically affordable, environmentally responsible and 
sustainable. 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2018 
Objectives: 
To provide de-centralised, preferably solar energy based piped water supply in 117 aspirational 
districts through community designed, implemented, maintained and safely managed single 
village water supply scheme. The programme would also sustain the Open Defecation Free 
status. 

Salient features: 

Mandatory components: Bore/tube well with casing, Pump with dry run sensor Pipes, Stand 
posts, Recharge structure, Soak pit, Infrastructure for schools and anganwadis and Customer 
Care Centre. 

Mandatory components where alternatives can be decided by the State: Installation of Solar 
panel or electricity, Mounting structure (steel or concrete), Storage structure (PVC or others) 
Stand -post to household connection, - Infrastructure funding by Gram Panchayat. 

Optional components: Community water treatment plant, Online chlorination, LED light for 
water drawl at night, Cattle troughs, Sensors to measure groundwater level in bore/tube well, 
discharge, leakage.

83 Funding Pattern: The Centre, State and Gram Panchayat sharing of funding pattern for North 
Eastern States and Himalayan States is 81:09:10 and Other States is45:45:10. 

Eligibility: Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: https://jalshakti -ddws.gov.in/sites/default/files/Swajal_guidelines.pdf 

 

7.4 Name of Scheme: Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) 

The Central Government assistance to States for rural water supply began in 1972 with the 
launch of Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme. It was renamed as National Rural 
Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) in 2009, which is a centrally sponsored scheme with fund 
sharing between the Centre and the States. Under NRDWP, one of the objectives was to “enable 
all households to have access to and use safe & adequate drinking water within premises to the 
extent possible”. It was proposed to achieve the goal by 2030, coinciding with the United 
Nation‟s Sustainable Development Goals. But now, it is has been planned to achieve the goal by 
2024 through Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM). As per the information available with DDWS, as on 
31.3.2019, only 18.33% of rural households i.e., 3.27 Crore out of the total 17.87 Crore rural 
households in the country, have piped water connection. 

Government of India has restructured and subsumed the ongoing National Rural Drinking Water 
Programme(NRDWP) into Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) to provide Functional Household Tap 
Connection (FHTC) to every rural household i.e., Har Ghar Nal Se Jal (HGNSJ) by 2024. 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2019 
Objectives: 
The broad objectives of the Mission are: i.) to provide FHTC to every rural household; ii.) to 
prioritize provision of FHTCs in qualityaffected areas, villages in drought prone and desert areas, 
Sansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY) villages, etc.; iii.) to provide functional tap connection to 
Schools, Anganwadi centres, GP buildings, Health centres, wellness centres and community 
buildings; iv.) to monitor functionality of tap connections; v.) to promote and ensure voluntary 
ownership among local community by way of contribution in cash, kind and/ or labour and 
voluntary labour (shramdaan); vi.) to assist in ensuring sustainability of water supply system, i.e. 
water source, water supply infrastructure, and funds for regular O&M; vii.) to empower and 
develop human resource in the sector such that the demands of construction, plumbing, 
electrical, water quality management, water treatment, catchment protection, O&M, etc. are 
taken care of in short and long term; and viii.) to bring awareness on various aspects and

84 significance of safe drinking water and involvement of stakeholders in manner that make water 
everyone's business. 

Salient features: 

The following kinds of works/ schemes are proposed to be taken up under JJM: i.) In -village 
water supply (PWS) infrastructure for tap water connection to every household; ii.) Reliable 
drinking water source development/ augmentation of existing sources; iii.) Transfer of water 
(multi -village scheme; where quantity & quality issues are there in the local water sources); iv.) 
Technological intervention for treatment to make water potable (where water quality is an issue, 
but quantity is sufficient); v.) Retrofitting of completed and ongoing piped water supply schemes 
to provide FHTC and raise the service level; vi.) Grey water management; vii.) Capacity building 
of various stakeholders and support activities to facilitate the implementation. 

The goal of JJM is to provide functional household tap connection to every household with 
service level at the rate of 55 litres per capita per day (lpcd). 

Funding Pattern: Total estimated cost of JJM is Rs. 3.60 Lakh Crore. The fund sharing pattern 
between Centre and State is 90:10 for Himalayan (Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh) and North - 
Eastern States, 100:0 for UTs and 50:50 for rest of the States. 

Eligibility: Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

 

For detail Information visit: https://jalshakti - 
ddws.gov.in/sites/default/files/JJM_Operational_Guidelines.pdf

85 Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 

 
8.1 Name of Scheme: National Afforestation Programme 

The National Afforestation Programme (NAP) scheme has been formulated by merger of four 9th 
Plan centrally sponsored afforestation schemes of the Ministry of Environment & Forests, 
namely, Integrated Afforestation and Eco-Development Projects Scheme (IAEPS), Area 
Oriented Fuel wood and Fodder Projects Scheme (AOFFPS), Conservation and Development of 
Non-Timber Forest Produce including Medicinal Plants Scheme (NTFP) and Association of 
Scheduled Tribes and Rural Poor in Regeneration of Degraded Forests (ASTRP), with a view to 
reducing multiplicity of schemes with similar objectives, ensuring uniformity in funding pattern 
and implementation mechanism, avoiding delays in availability of funds to the field level and 
institutionalising peoples participation in project formulation and its implementation. The 
Scheme will be operated by the National Afforestation and Eco -Development Board, Ministry of 
Environment and Forests as a 100% Central Sector/ Centrally Sponsored Scheme 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2000 
Objectives: 
Short term objectives: Regeneration and eco-development of degraded forests and adjoining 
areas on a watershed basis. - Augmentation of the availability of fuelwood, fodder and grasses 
from the regenerated areas. - Securing people's participation in planning and regeneration efforts 
to ensure sustainability and equitable distribution of forest products from the regenerated lands, 
and to promote the partnership concept in the management and administration of forests and 
common property resources. - Promote agroforestry and development of Common Property 
Resources. - Promotion of fuel saving devices to encourage efficient use of fuelwood and to 
reduce the drudgery of rural women involved in collection of wood, as also to improve the 
environment. - Conservation and improvement of non -timber forest produce such as bamboo, 
cane and medicinal plants - Encourage production of non -timber products such as wax, honey, 
fruits and nuts from the regenerated areas. - Raising coastal shelterbelts to mitigate the adverse 
impacts of cyclonic winds. - Develop water resources through plantation and water harvesting 
programme. - Development and extension of improved technologies such as clonal propagation 
and use of root trainers for raising seedlings, mycorrhizal inoculation, etc. Rehabilitation of 
special problem lands like saline/alkaline soils, ravines, desert areas, coastal areas, mined areas, 
Himalayas, Aravallis and Western Ghats. - Employment generation for the disadvantaged 
sections of society, particularly women, scheduled castes/scheduled tribes and landless rural 
labourers, inhabiting the forests and adjoining areas.

86 Long -term objectives: Protection, Conservation of natural resources through active involvement 
of the people. - Checking land degradation, deforestation and loss of biodiversity. - Ecological 
restoration and environmental conservation and eco-development, - Evolving village level 
people‟s organisation which can manage the natural resources in and around villages in a 
sustainable manner, - Fulfilment of the broader objectives of productivity, equity, and 
sustainability for the general good of the people. - Improve quality of life and self -sustenance 
aspect of people living in and around forest areas. - Capability endowment and skill 
enhancement for improving employability of the rural people. 

Salient features : 

Implementing Agencies: The scheme would be implemented by the following State agencies: 
New projects during the 10th Plan period: The two -tier set up namely the Forest Development 
Agencies (FDAs) and Joint Forest Management Committees (JFMCs). Maintenance of 9 th Plan 
projects during 10th Plan period: State Forest Departments or the FDAs as the case may be. 

Projects under the scheme can be up to five years‟ duration. Planting will be permitted up to the 
4th year of the project. Five years of maintenance will be permitted for all plantations as per the 
proposal. The funds for maintenance will be released when due. Advance work will be 
sanctioned up to the fourth year of the Tenth Plan. The sanction of the project beyond Tenth 
Five-Year Plan will be subject to the Scheme continuing during the Eleventh Five -Year Plan. In 
case the scheme is not continued during the Eleventh Plan, the State Governments will have to 
meet the maintenance cost of such plantations beyond Tenth Five-Year Plan at their own cost. 

Funding Pattern : The scheme would be implemented as a Centrally Sponsored Scheme/ Central 
Sector Scheme for the FDAs to which projects will be sanctioned directly by the NAEB, with 
100% central funding 

Eligibility : 

The watershed/ catchment area approach will continue to be followed wherever possible. 
However, clusters of compact blocks can also be taken up for treatment if the local situation so 
demands. 

Minimum area of compact block in the scheme is not prescribed, though projects will as far as 
possible aim for compactness, and blocks of less than 20 ha will not normally be taken for 
treatment. However, in exceptional circumstances, blocks with smaller size may be considered. 

Project areas should be selected in such a way that major part of the project comprises degraded 
forests, pasture and community lands. In addition, lands such as roadside, canal side and railway 
lines may also be included in the projects as longitudinal/strip plantations of two rows or more.

87 The project area should be confined to recorded forests and adjoining land areas including 
village common lands, community lands, revenue wastelands, Jhum lands and private lands. 
Appropriate agro -forestry models may be promoted on such Jhum and private lands. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: 
http://www.naeb.nic.in/NAP_revised%20Guidelines%20English.pdf

88 Ministry of Finance 
9.1 Name of Scheme: National Pension System (NPS) 
Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2004 

Objectives of the scheme: 

The National Pension System (NPS) was launched on 1st January, 2004 with the objective of 
providing retirement income to all the citizens. NPS aims to institute pension reforms and to 
inculcate the habit of saving for retirement amongst the citizens. 

Initially, NPS was introduced for the new government recruits (except armed forces). With effect 
from 1st May, 2009, NPS has been provided for all citizens of the country including the 
unorganised sector workers on voluntary basis. 

Salient features: 

NPS offers following important features to help subscriber save for retirement: 

• The subscriber will be allotted a unique Permanent Retirement Account Number (PRAN). 
This unique account number will remain the same for the rest of subscriber's life. This 
unique PRAN can be used from any location in India. 

PRAN will provide access to two personal accounts: 

• Tier I Account : This is a non-withdrawable account meant for savings for retirement. 

• Tier II Account : This is simply a voluntary savings facility. The subscriber is free to 
withdraw savings from this account whenever subscriber wishes. No tax benefit is 
available on this account. 

Income Tax Act allows benefits under NPS as per the following sections: 

• On Employee‟s contribution: Employee‟s own contribution is eligible for tax deduction 
under sec 80 CCD (1) of Income Tax Act up to 10% of salary (Basic + DA). This is 
within the overall ceiling of Rs. 1.50 Lacs under Sec. 80 CCE of the Income Tax Act. 

• On Employer‟s contribution: Up to 10% of Basic & DA (no upper ceiling) under 
80CCD (2). This rebate is over and above 80 C.

89 • Exclusive Tax Benefit: As announced by Govt of India in Budget 2015 -16, subscriber 
will be allowed tax deduction in addition to the deduction allowed under Sec. 80CCD(1) 
for additional contribution in his NPS account subject to maximum of Rs. 50,000/ - under 
sec. 80CCD 1(B). 

Structure of Scheme: 

Central Government Employees 

NPS is applicable to all new employees of Central Government service (except Armed Forces) 
and Central Autonomous Bodies joining Government service on or after 1st January 2004. Any 
other government employee who is not mandatorily covered under NPS can also subscribe 
to NPS under "All Citizen Model" through a Point of Presence - Service Provider (POP -SP). 

State Government Employees 

NPS is applicable to all the employees of State Governments, State Autonomous Bodies joining 
services after the date of notification by the respective State Governments. Any other 
government employee who is not mandatorily covered under NPS can also subscribe 
to NPS under "All Citizen Model" through a Point of Presence - Service Provider (POP -SP). 

Corporate 

A Corporate would have the flexibility to decide investment choice either at subscriber level or 
at the corporate level centrally for all its underlying subscribers. 

Individual 

All citizens of India between the age of 18 and 60 years as on the date of submission of his / her 
application to Point of Presence (POP) / Point of Presence -Service Provider (POP -SP) can 
join NPS. 
Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories. 

 

For detail Information visit: https://india.gov.in/spotlight/national -pension -system -retirement - 
plan-all

90 9.2 Name of Scheme: Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY) 

Financial Inclusion is an important priority of the Government. The objective of Financial 
Inclusion is to extend financial services to the large hitherto un -served population of the country 
to unlock its growth potential. The Government initiated the National Mission for Financial 
Inclusion (NMFI), namely, Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY) in August, 2014 to 
provide universal banking services for every unbanked household, based on the guiding 
principles of banking the unbanked, securing the unsecured, funding the unfunded and serving 
un-served and under -served areas. With a view to further deepening the financial inclusion 
interventions in the country, PMJDY has been extended beyond 14.8.2018 with the focus on 
opening of accounts shifting from “every household” to “every unbanked adult”. 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2014 
Objectives: 
Ensuring access to various financial services like availability of basic savings bank account, 
access to need based credit, remittances facility, insurance and pension to the excluded sections 
i.e. weaker sections & low income groups. This deep penetration at affordable cost is possible 
only with effective use of technology. 
Salient features : 

PMJDY to be executed in the Mission Mode, envisages provision of affordable financial services 
to all citizens within a reasonable distance. It comprises of the following six pillars: - a. Universal 
access to banking facilities: Mapping of each district into Sub Service Area (SSA) catering to 
1000 -1500 households in a manner that every habitation has access to banking services within a 
th reasonable distance say 5 km by 14 August, 2015. Coverage of parts of J&K, Himachal 
Pradesh, Uttarakhand, North East and the Left Wing Extremism affected districts which have 
telecom connectivity and infrastructure constraints would spill over to the Phase II of the 
program. 

Providing Basic Banking Accounts with overdraft facility and RuPay Debit card to all 
households: The effort would be to first cover all uncovered households with banking facilities 
by August, 2015, by opening basic bank accounts. Account holder would be provided a RuPay 
Debit Card. Facility of an overdraft to every basic banking account holder would be considered 
after satisfactory operation / credit history of six months. 

Financial Literacy Programme: Financial literacy would be an integral part of the Mission in 
order to let the beneficiaries make best use of the financial services being made available to 
them.

91 Creation of Credit Guarantee Fund: Creation of a Credit Guarantee Fund would be to cover the 
defaults in overdraft accounts. 

Micro - Insurance: To provide micro - insurance to all willing and eligible persons by 14th 
August, 2018, and then on an ongoing basis. f. Unorganized sector Pension schemes like 
Swavalamban: By 14th August, 2018 and then on an ongoing basis. 
Financial Inclusion Plan: 

Comprehensive Financial Inclusion of the excluded sections is proposed to be achieved by 14th 
August, 2018 in two phases as under: 

Phase I (15th Aug, 2014 – 14th Aug, 2015) • Universal access to banking facilities in all areas 
except areas with infrastructure and connectivity constrains like parts of North East, Himachal 
Pradesh, Uttarakhand, J&K and 82 Left Wing Extremism (LWE) districts. • Providing Basic 
Banking Accounts and RuPay Debit card which has inbuilt accident insurance cover of Rs. 1 
lakh. Aadhaar number will be seeded to make account ready for DBT payment. • Financial 
Literacy Programme 

Phase II (15th Aug, 2015 – 14th Aug, 2018) • Overdraft facility up to Rs. 5000/ - after six months 
of satisfactory operation / history • Creation of Credit Guarantee Fund for coverage of defaults in 
A/Cs with overdraft limit up to Rs. 5,000/ -. • Micro Insurance • Unorganized sector Pension 
schemes like Swavalamban. Some of the Phase II activities would also be carried out in Phase I. 
In addition, in this phase, coverage of households in hilly, tribal and difficult areas would be 
carried out. Moreover, this phase would focus on coverage of remaining adults in the households 
and students. 

Eligibility: All households across the country - both rural and urban are to be covered under the 
scheme. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: https://pmjdy.gov.in/files/E -Documents/PMJDY_BROCHURE_ENG.pdf 

 

 

9.3 Name of Scheme: Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana (PMJJBY) 

The Pradhan MantriJeevanJyotiBimaYojana (PMJJBY) is a one year life insurance scheme, 
renewable from year to year, offering coverage for death due to any reason and is available to 
people in the age group of 18 to 50 years( life cover upto age 55) having a savings bank account

92 who give their consent to join and enable auto-debit. The risk cover on the lives of the enrolled 
persons has commenced from 1st June 2015. 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2015 
Objectives: 
The aim of the plan is to give financial security for the poor and underprivileged on the loss of a 
family member especially the breadwinner. The life cover starts from 1st June of every year until 
31st May of the next year and can be renewed year after year. 
Salient features : 

Under PMJJBY scheme, life cover of Rs. 2 lakhs is available for a one year period stretching 
from 1st June to 31st May at a premium of Rs.330/ - per annum per member and is renewable 
every year. It is offered / administered through LIC and other Indian private Life Insurance 
companies. For enrolment banks have tied up with insurance companies. Participating Bank is 
the Master policy holder. 

The assurance on the life of the member shall terminate on any of the following events and no 
benefit will become payable there under: 1) On attaining age 55 years (age near birth day) 
subject to annual renewal up to that date (entry, however, will not be possible beyond the age of 
50 years). 2) Closure of account with the Bank or insufficiency of balance to keep the insurance 
in force. 3) A person can join PMJJBY with one Insurance company with one bank account only. 

Individuals who exit the scheme at any point may re-join the scheme in future years by paying 
the annual premium and submitting a self-declaration of good health. 

Initial enrolment period in the scheme was from 1st May to 31st May „2015, which has now been 
extended up to 31st Aug‟ 2015, by this date eligible persons can join the scheme without giving 
self-certification of good health, even though eligible persons can join the scheme on any date by 
paying the premium for full year. In case of claim the nominees/heirs of the insured person have 
to contact respective bank branch where the insured person was having bank account. A death 
certificate and simple claim form is required to submit and the claim amount will be transferred 
to nominees account. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

 

For detail Information visit: https://www.jansuraksha.gov.in/Files/PMJJBY/English/About - 
PMJJBY.pdf

93 9.4 Name of Scheme: Pradhan Mantri Suraksha BimaYojana (PMSBY) 

The Scheme is available to people in the age group 18 to 70 years with a bank account who give 
their consent to join / enable auto -debit on or before 31st May for the coverage period 1st June to 
31st May on an annual renewal basis. Aadhar would be the primary KYC for the bank account. 
The risk coverage under the scheme isRs.2 lakh for accidental death and full disability and Rs. 1 
lakh for partial disability. The premium of Rs. 12 per annum is to be deducted from the account 
holder‟s bank account through „auto -debit‟ facility in one installment. The scheme is being 
offered by Public Sector General Insurance Companies or any other General Insurance Company 
who are willing to offer the product on similar terms with necessary approvals and tie up with 
banks for this purpose 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 

Year of Commencement: 2015 

Objectives: An accident insurance scheme, PMSBY offers a one -year accidental death and 
disability cover, which can be renewed annually. 
Salient features : 

The premium will be directly auto-debited by the bank from the subscribers account on or before 
1st June of each annual coverage period under the scheme. 
Risk Coverage: 

• Death - Rs 2 Lakh 

• Total and irrecoverable loss of both eyes or loss of use of both hands or feet or loss of 
sight of one eye and loss of use of hand or foot - Rs 2 Lakh 

• Total and irrecoverable loss of sight of one eye or loss of use of one hand or foot – Rs.1 
Lakh. 

Eligibility : Available to people in age group 18 to 70 years with bank account. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

 

For detail Information visit: https://financialservices.gov.in/insurance -divisions/Government - 
Sponsored -Socially -Oriented -Insurance -Schemes/Pradhan -Mantri -Suraksha -Bima - 
Yojana(PMSBY)

94 9.5 Name of Scheme: Atal Pension Yojana (APY) 

The Government of India is extremely concerned about the old age income security of the 
working poor and is focused on encouraging and enabling them to join the National Pension 
System (NPS). To address the longevity risks among the workers in unorganised sector and to 
encourage the workers in unorganised sector to voluntarily save for their retirement, who 
constitute 88% of the total labour force of 47.29 crore as per the 66th Round of NSSO Survey of 
2011 -12, but do not have any formal pension provision, the Government had started the 
Swavalamban Scheme in 2010 -11. However, coverage under Swavalamban Scheme is 
inadequate mainly due to lack of guaranteed pension benefits at the age of 60. 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2015 
Objectives of the scheme: 
The Government announced the introduction of universal social security schemes in the 
Insurance and Pension sectors for all Indians, specially the poor and the under -privileged, in the 
Budget for the year 2015 -16. Therefore, it has been announced that the Government will launch 
the Atal Pension Yojana (APY), which will provide a defined pension, depending on the 
contribution, and its period. The APY will be focussed on all citizens in the unorganised sector, 
who join the National Pension System (NPS) administered by the Pension Fund Regulatory and 
Development Authority (PFRDA). 

Salient features: 

Under the APY, the subscribers would receive the fixed minimum pension of Rs. 1000 per 
month, Rs. 2000 per month, Rs. 3000 per month, Rs. 4000 per month, Rs. 5000 per month, at the 
age of 60 years, depending on their contributions, which itself would be based on the age of 
joining the APY. The minimum age of joining APY is 18 years and maximum age is 40 years. 
Therefore, minimum period of contribution by any subscriber under APY would be 20 years or 
more. The benefit of fixed minimum pension would be guaranteed by the Government. The APY 
would be introduced from 1st June, 2015. 

Under this scheme, the individual subscribers shall have an option to make the contribution on a 
monthly basis. Banks are required to collect additional amount for delayed payments, such 
amount will vary from minimum Rs. 1 per month to Rs 10/- per month as shown below: 

• Rs. 1 per month for contribution upto Rs. 100 per month. 

• Rs. 2 per month for contribution upto Rs. 101 to 500/- per month.

95 • Rs. 5 per month for contribution between Rs 501/ - to 1000/ - per month. 

• Rs. 10 per month for contribution beyond Rs 1001/ - per month. 

The fixed amount of interest/penalty will remain as part of the pension corpus of the subscriber. 
Discontinuation of payments of contribution amount shall lead to following: 
• After 6 months account will be frozen. 

• After 12 months account will be deactivated. 

• After 24 months account will be closed. 

Funding Pattern: 

Government would provide (i) fixed pension guarantee for the subscribers; (ii) would co- 
contribute 50% of the total contribution or Rs. 1000 per annum, whichever is lower, to eligible 
subscribers; and (iii) would also reimburse the promotional and development activities including 
incentive to the contribution collection agencies to encourage people to join the APY. 

Eligibility: 

Atal Pension Yojana (APY) is open to all bank account holders. The Central Government would 
also co -contribute 50% of the total contribution or Rs. 1000 per annum, whichever is lower, to 
each eligible subscriber account, for a period of 5 years, i.e., from Financial Year 2015 -16 to 
2019 -20, who join the NPS between the period 1st June, 2015 and 31st December, 2015 and who 
are not members of any statutory social security scheme and who are not income tax payers. 
However the scheme will continue after this date but Government Co -contribution will not be 
available. 3.2 The Government co -contribution is payable to eligible PRANs by PFRDA after 
receiving the confirmation from Central Record Keeping Agency at such periodicity as may be 
decided by PFRDA. 

The minimum age of joining APY is 18 years and maximum age is 40 years. The age of exit and 
start of pension would be 60 years. Therefore, minimum period of contribution by the subscriber 
under APY would be 20 years or more. 

Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: https://npscra.nsdl.co.in/nsdl/scheme - 
details/APY_Scheme_Details.pdf

96 Ministry of Food Processing Industries 

 
10.1 Name of Scheme: Mega Food Park 
Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2008 

Objectives of the scheme: 

The primary objective of the MFPS is to provide modern infrastructure facilities for the food 
processing along the value chain from the farm to the market. It will include creation of 
processing infrastructure near the farm, transportation, logistics and centralized processing 
centres. The main feature of the Scheme is a cluster based approach. The scheme will be 
demand -driven and will facilitate food processing units to meet environmental and safety 
standards. 

The expected outcome is increased realization for farmers, creation of high quality processing 
infrastructure, reduction in wastage, capacity building of producers, processors and creation 
of an efficient supply chain along with significant direct and indirect employment 
generation. 

Salient features: 

The Scheme aims to facilitate the establishment of a strong food processing industry backed by 
an efficient supply chain, which would include collection Centres, primary processing Centres 
and cold chain infrastructure. The food processing units, under the scheme, would be located at 
a Central Processing Centre (CPC) with need based common infrastructure required for 
processing, packaging, environmental protection systems, quality control labs, trade facilitation 
Centres, etc. 

The extent of land required for establishing the CPC is estimated to be between 50-100 
acres, though the actual requirement of land would depend upon the business plan of 
investor(s), which may vary from region to region. CPC would be supported by Primary 
Processing Centres (PPC) and Collection Centres (CCs) in identified locations based on a 
techno -feasibility study, adequate to meet the raw material requirements of the CPC. The 
land required for setting up of PPCs and CCs at various locations would be in addition to land 
required for setting up the CPC. 

It is expected that, on an average, each project may have around 25 -30 food processing units 
with a collective investment of around Rs. 250 crore that would eventually lead to an annual

97 turnover of about Rs. 450 -500 crore and creation of direct / indirect employment of about 
5000 persons. Each MFP on being fully operational will also benefit about 25000 farmers. 
However, the actual configuration of the project may vary depending upon the business 
plan for each Mega Food Park. The aggregate investment in CPC, PPCs and CCs should be 
proportionate and commensurate to the size of the total project keeping in view the economies 
of scale. 

The spirit of the guidelines of the Mega Food Parks Scheme is to facilitate setting up of o n l y 
food processing industries. Accordingly, only food processing industries that make food 
products fit for human / animal consumption may be permitted to be set up in the Mega Food 
Parks. Packaging facilities of food products as ancillary to the food processing industries will 
also be eligible for setting up in the Mega Food Parks. 

Funding Pattern: 

The Scheme shall provide a capital grant at the rate of 50 percent of the eligible project 
cost in general areas and at the rate of 75 percent of eligible project cost in difficult and hilly 
areas i.e. North East Region including Sikkim, J&K, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and ITDP 
notified areas of the States subject to a maximum of Rs. 50 crore per project. 

Project management consultant (PMC) up to 2% of the approved grant would be considered 
under eligible project cost. 

In the interest of expeditious implementation of the projects, the Ministry would engage a 
Program Management Agency (PMA) to provide management, capacity building, coordination 
and monitoring support. For meeting the cost of the above and also other promotional 
activities by the Ministry, office expenses & travel expenses related to the scheme 
amounting up to 5% of the overall grant available, will be earmarked. 

The project cost for the purpose of eligibility under this Scheme would consist of the 
following components: 

Core Processing Facilities: 

Central Processing Centre : Cost of civil work & equipments for common facilities like 
testing laboratory, cleaning, grading, sorting and packing facilities, dry warehouses, specialized 
storage facilities, cold storage including Controlled Atmosphere Chambers, Pressure 
Ventilators, variable humidity stores, pre -cooling chambers, ripening chambers etc., cold chain 
infrastructure including reefer vans, packaging unit, irradiation facilities, steam sterilization 
units, steam generating units, Food incubation cum development centres etc. 

Primary Processing Centres and Farm Proximate Collection Centres : These shall have 
components like cleaning, grading, sorting and packing facilities (including equipment), dry

98 warehouses, specialized cold stores including pre-cooling chambers, ripening chambers 
(including equipment), reefer vans, mobile pre-coolers, mobile collection vans etc. 

The above mentioned facilities are only illustrative and the exact nature of facilities may 
vary from project to project based on specific requirements as appraised by the concerned 
bank. However, it is desirable to allocate at least 25 percent of the eligible project cost 
towards creation of above mentioned core processing facilities. 

Factory buildings: 

Depending on demand in the area, the Mega Food Park may provide standard factory sheds 
for Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs) which are t o be built on a maximum of 10 per 
cent of the area of CPC as part of plug and play facilities for MSEs. 

Enabling Basic Infrastructure: 

It will include site development including development of industrial plots, boundary wall, 
roads, drainage, water supply, electricity supply including captive power plant, effluent 
treatment plant, telecommunication lines, parking bay including traffic management system, 
weighbridges etc. at the PPC and CPC level . However, of the total proposed cost of captive 
power plant, cost not exceeding Rs.10 crore shall be considered as eligible project cost for 
grant assessment. Any additional cost towards s e t t i n g up of captive power plant would 
be required to be met exclusively from SPV‟s contribution through equity and debt. The 
SPV has to demonstrate a firm plan to ensure good quality and assured power supply to 
prospective units in the Park. 

Non-Core Infrastructure 

It will consist of support infrastructure such as administrative buildings, training centre 
including equipment, trade and display centre, crèche, canteen, worker‟s hostel, offices of 
service providers, labour rest and recreation facilities, marketing support system, etc. However, 
the cost of non -core infrastructure facilities not exceeding 10 percent of the eligible project 
cost, would be eligible for grant purpose. 

Project Implementation Expenses 

This would include cost of hiring the services of domain consultants by the SPV‟s for 
preparation of DPRs, supply chain management, engineering/designing and construction 
supervision etc. 

Land 

At least 50 acres of land for the project shall be arranged by the SPV either by purchase or on

99 lease of at least 75 years. The registered value of such land would be taken as part of the 
project cost and contribution/share of the SPV. The GoI grant shall not be used for 
procurement/purchase of land. The land and/or infrastructure taken on lease for PPCs / CCs, the 
lease period should be at least 25 years. 

Time Schedule: 

The time schedule for completion and operationalisation of project will be 30 months as 
detailed below from the date of issue of final approval letter unless extended by IMAC for 
the reasons to be recorded: 

 
Sl. 
No. Particulars Time Period 
1. Final Approval to release of 1st instalment 6 months 
2. 1st instalment to release of 2nd instalment 8 months 
3. 2nd instalment to release of 3rd instalment 8 months 
4. 3rd instalment to release of 4th and final instalment 8 months 
 Total 30 months 

 
Eligibility: All Farmers 

Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: 
http://mofpi.nic.in/sites/default/files/revised_guideline_mfps_w.e.f._21.07.2016_1.pdf 

 

 
10.2 Name of Scheme: Promotional Activities through National /International Exhibitions/ 
Fairs and Studies/Surveys, Workshops, Seminars 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Objectives of the scheme: 
The promotional activities of the Ministry are aimed at the development of the 
processed food sector, creating awareness, attracting investment etc. Participation in 
national/international exhibitions / fairs is made to disseminate information regarding 
food processing industries, familiarizing the existing and prospective entrepreneurs with

100 modern techniques of production and packaging, development of market and 
popularisation of products. The Ministry also provides assistance for organizing 
workshops, seminars, exhibitions/fairs. Studies/ surveys/feasibility reports are essential 
to monitor/review/assess and revise various schemes/plans/vision for Ministry as well as 
allied sectors. Assistance is also provided for organizing study tours for exposure to 
various aspects of Food Processing. 

Structure of Scheme: 

(i) Seminar, workshop, conference, campaign, symposium in India on objectives and 
focus areas of these scheme guidelines; 

(ii) National / International Fair / Exhibition / Roadshow / Mela / Business Summit & 
Investors Meet / World Food India (WFI) / Food India on objectives and focus areas of 
these scheme guidelines; 

(iii) Ministry‟s Logo support on objectives and focus areas of these scheme guidelines; 

(iv) Advertisement and publicity; and 

(v) Any other methods of disseminating information on food processing. 

Seminar, workshop, conference, campaign, symposium in India on objectives and focus 
areas of these scheme guidelines 
Annual Strategy Plan (ASP) - Every year, based on the objectives and focus areas of these 
scheme guidelines, Ministry will prepare an Annual Strategy Plan (ASP) before 1st week of 
January in consultation with all Divisions of Ministry and call for Request For Proposal (RFP) 
from Apex Industry Bodies / Associations / Chambers and finalize it before 4th week of January. 
The ASP will include number of event(s) to be conducted. Provided that the selected Apex 
Industry Body / Association / Chamber shall sign the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) 
with Ministry of Food Processing Industries. Provided further that Ministry may extend the 
period of MoU for successive period of three months with nominal escalation of additional 10 % 
per annum or parts thereof, subject to acceptance by the selected Apex Industry Body / 
Association / Chamber. The Ministry will publish ASP on its website; 

Pattern of Assistance: 

When an organization selected through ASP organizes any of the above event, Ministry will 
extend financial assistance up to 50 % of the actual event cost or maximum of Rs. 5 lakhs per 
event, whichever is less. If the event is organized in NE Region, Ministry will extend 100 % 
financial assistance of the actual event cost or maximum of Rs. 5 lakhs per event, whichever is 
less;

101 When Ministry sponsors / co -sponsors any of the above event organized by Central / State 
Government and their institutions like APEDA, CFTRI, ITPO and Apex Industry Bodies / 
Associations / Chambers, Ministry will extend 100 % financial assistance of the actual event cost 
or maximum of Rs. 10 lakhs per event, whichever is less; 

Ministry may extend financial support to Central / State Government and their Institutions for 
organizing any of the event(s), subject to participation of Ministry; and 
Notwithstanding anything contained above, Ministry may extend financial assistance to 
deserving cases for organizing an event, subject to participation of Ministry. 

National / International Fair / Exhibition / Roadshow / Mela / Business Summit & 
Investors Meet / World Food India (WFI) on objectives and focus areas of these scheme 
guidelines. 
Pattern of Assistance: 

Ministry will extend financial assistance to organize any of the above event, up to 50 % of the 
actual event cost or maximum of Rs. 10 lakhs per event, whichever is less; 
When Ministry organizes World Food India (WFI) and its allied event(s), an international event 
once in two years, Ministry will select an Event Partner and a Knowledge Partner for organizing 
such event through Request for Proposal (RFP) or select an agency based on previous experience 
for organizing WFI and there will be no ceiling on the expenditure to be incurred unless 
otherwise restricted by Government of India; 

When Ministry in close association with Central / State Government and their institutions like 
APEDA, CFTRI, ITPO and Apex Industry Bodies / Associations / Chambers, organize any of 
the above event in India, Ministry will extend financial assistance up to 25 % of the actual event 
cost or maximum of Rs. 10 lakhs per event, whichever is less; 

When Ministry sponsors / co -sponsors any of the above event organized by Central / State 
Government and their institutions like APEDA, CFTRI, ITPO and Apex Industry Bodies / 
Associations / Chambers, Ministry will extend 100 % financial assistance of the actual event cost 
or maximum of Rs. 10 lakhs per event, whichever is less; and 

When Central / State Government and their Institutions organize any of the above international 
event or participate in such international event, Ministry will extend financial assistance up to 25 
% of the actual event cost or maximum of Rs. 20 lakhs per event, whichever is less. 

Ministry participation in seminar, workshop, conference, campaign, symposium and national 
fair, exhibition, mela:

102 Ministry may participate in such events by seeking nominations from the Apex Industry Bodies / 
Associations / Chambers, of entrepreneurs belonging to SC / ST / NER category and women 
entrepreneurs, who would be interested in participating in such events and display their products. 
The stall space in such events would be hired on behalf of the nominated entrepreneurs by the 
Apex Industry Bodies / Associations / Chambers and reimbursed by MoFPI. 

Promotion of food processing sector in every Constituency of India: 

A special dispensation exclusively for organizing any of the event falling under the components 
of these scheme guidelines in every Constituency of India with reference to objectives and focus 
areas of these scheme guidelines is being provided; 

Ministry will extend this special provision to all elected Members of Parliament (Lok Sabha) 
subject to receipt of recommendation from the Member of Parliament (Lok Sabha) once in their 
tenure for organising such event in association with Apex Industry Bodies / Associations / 
Chambers and involving State Industries Department / State Chambers, wherever possible; 

Ministry will extend financial assistance to organize an event in every constituency for the 
remaining period of 17th Lok Sabha, in every region viz., northern, western, eastern, southern 
and north -eastern in order to achieve the objectives in a radical way; and 

Pattern of assistance - Ministry will extend 100 % financial assistance, maximum of Rs. 5 lakhs 
for an event in every constituency or actual event cost, whichever is less. 

Food Processing Industry on wheels – a Mobile Processing Unit (MPU) developed by 
Indian Institute of Food Processing Technology (IIFPT) 
IIFPT will organize events “Food Processing Industry on wheels”, in Tomato / Onion / Garlic / 
Ginger producing clusters to aid farmers and small processors to process these farm produce in 
the Mobile Processing Unit (MPU) at field level with no repetition of such event at same 
location. The objectives of the event are : - 1. Protecting farmers from price risks during glut in 
market by converting their produce into value added products; 2. Minimization of wastages in 
post-harvest handling of farm perishables; 3. Livelihood enhancement in rural areas by providing 
market options for processed foods; 4. Ensuring good quality processed food at a reasonable 
price to consumer; and 5. Strengthening food value chain by eliminating the intermediaries. 

Pattern of assistance - Ministry will extend 100 % financial assistance, maximum of Rs. 4 lakhs 
per event including advertisement or actual event cost, whichever is less. 

“Food India” to be organized by State Government on objectives and focus areas of these 
scheme guidelines

103 “Food India” is a State event organized by the State Government in association with one of the 
Apex Industry Body / Association / Chamber; 

It is a quarterly event, subject to a gap of 2 years between the events, if organized in the same 
State; and 

Pattern of assistance - Ministry will provide financial assistance of 50% of the actual event cost 
or maximum of Rs. 50 lakh per event, whichever is less. 
Provided that Ministry of Food Processing Industries may meet the entire expenditure in 
situations wherein the State Government does not come forward to fund such an event. However, 
the State Government will be required to provide logistical support for such event. 

Advertisement and Publicity 

Ministry will publish various advertisements in print media like newspaper, magazine and audio - 
visual spots in Radio/TVs for promotion of various schemes and allied activities being 
undertaken by the Ministry to promote Food Processing sector; 

Ministry will also create various print materials like brochures, e-books, pocket books, 
multimedia aids like CDs, pen drives, social media digital contents, promotional movies, 
software development and required accessories for interactive digital display, investor 
facilitation website; 

The advertisement and publicity and preparation and distribution of publicity material will be 
undertaken through a professional agency selected through competitive bidding process among 
the agencies empaneled with Directorate of Audio -Visual Publicity (DAVP) [re -designated as 
Bureau of Outreach & Communication (BoC)] as per media policy / guidelines laid down by 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and BoC from time to time; and 

The expenditure will be borne as per DAVP rates wherever available. 

Ministry‟s Logo Support on objectives and focus areas of these scheme guidelines 

Based on the request, Ministry may extend non-financial logo support to an event, if such event 
is related to food processing sectors. The use of “Ministry‟s Logo” shall be allowed / permitted 
subject to the following terms and conditions: - 

1. Ministry has the right to withdraw permission for use of its logo with or without giving any 
notice; 2. The logo of Ministry shall be used for the requested purpose in such a way that it will 
not affect the name, reputation and interests of the Ministry; 3. The logo support extended by 
Ministry is only for the event for which Ministry has accorded approval and not for any other 
purpose or for any future event; and 4. Disputes of any kind, if arises, by virtue of use of

104 Ministry‟s logo, the same shall be resolved only by applicant organization using their means and 
resources. 

Ministry will extend logo support without any condition to:- 1. An event organized by all 
establishments / offices and Institutions under Ministry; 2. Financial support extended by 
Ministry for an event; 3. An event organized by Central / State Government and their Institutions 
directly or jointly with Apex Industry Bodies / Associations / Chambers if such event is related 
to food processing sectors; and an event organized / sponsored / supported by Indian Embassies / 
Missions abroad to promote Ministry‟s initiative. 

Eligibility: 

1. Apex Industry Bodies / Associations / Chambers like Confederation of Indian 
Industry (CII), Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry 
(FICCI), Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India 
(ASSOCHAM), PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry (PHDCCI), All India 
Food Processors' Association (AIFPA), Indian Chamber of Commerce (ICC), 
Dalit Indian Chamber of Commerce and Industry (DICCI), Federation of 
Industry & Commerce of North Eastern Region ( FINER) and State Chambers; 
2. Central / State Government and their Institutions like Agricultural and Processed 
Food Products Export Development Authority (APEDA), Central Food 
Technological Research Institute (CFTRI), India Trade Promotion Organization 
(ITPO); and 
3. Central / State University. 

Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: 
https://mofpi.nic.in/sites/default/files/revised_guidelines_of_the_scheme_of_promotional_activ 
ities_wef_09 -12-2019_1.pdf 

 

 
10.3 Name of Scheme: Revised Operational Guidelines of the Scheme for Integrated Cold 
Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure 
Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2008 
Objectives of the scheme:

105 The objective of the scheme is to provide integrated cold chain, preservation and value addition 
infrastructure facilities without any break, from the farm gate to the consumer in order to 
reduce post -harvest losses of horticulture and non -horticulture agri -produce. This will enable 
linking groups of producers to processors and market through a well equipped supply chain 
and cold chain, thereby ensuring remunerative prices to farmers and year -round availability 
of food products to consumers. 

Structure of Scheme: 

The scheme allows flexibility in project planning with special emphasis on creation of cold 
chain infrastructure at farm level. The scheme will have the following project components: 

a) Farm Level Infrastructure, which may include processing centre, situated in the catchment 
area of the targeted produce. 

For projects in the fruits & vegetables sector, 

b) Distribution hub - This shall have a modern multi -product, multi -temperature cold storage. 

c) Refrigerated vans/ refrigerated trucks/ insulated vans/mobile insulated tankers. 

d) Irradiation facility. 

Assistance under the scheme can be availed for creation of the following facilities: 

i. Integrated Pack -house (with mechanized sorting & grading line/ packing line/ waxing line/ 
staging cold rooms, etc.) 

ii. Ripening Chamber(s) 

iii. Cold Storage Unit(s) 

iv. Controlled Atmosphere (CA) storage 

v. Frozen Storage/Deep freezers 

vi. IQF line, Tunnel Freezer, Spiral Freezer, Blast Freezer, Plate Freezer 

vii. Vacuum Freeze Drying 

viii. Milk Chilling / Bulk Milk Cooling/ Milk Processing Unit 

ix. Poultry/Meat/Marine/Fishery Processing Unit 

x. Packaging line for chilled /frozen/temperature controlled products

106 xi. Food Irradiation unit 

xii. Refrigerated/ Insulated transport 

xiii. Pre Cooling Unit(s) 

xiv. Mobile pre-coolers 

xv. Retail refrigerated carts, temperature controlled solar powered retail carts (maximum 10 
numbers to be assisted per project) 
xvi. Reefer boats (maximum 10 numbers to be assisted per project) 

xvii. Refrigerated Containers including multi -modal container units 

xviii. Renewable/ alternate energy technologies (solar, bio-mass, wind etc.) for the project. 

xix. Accessories/support infrastructure/ utilities such as fixed racking system in Cold/CA 
storage, fork lifts, reach trucks, bins, insulated fish boxes, pallets, dock levellers, mezzanine 
flooring, ETP, boiler, CIP unit, Depodder, Peeler, Slicer/Dicer, Blancher, sorting/grading line, 
etc. 

xx. In-house product testing laboratory 

xxi. Any other modern technology for temperature controlled storage, processing, value addition 
and preservation infrastructure as may be decided by Inter Ministerial Approval Committee 
(IMAC). 

Funding Pattern: 

The scheme will have two types of pattern of financial assistance: - 

(a) For storage infrastructure including Pack House and Pre cooling unit, ripening chamber 
and transport infrastructure, grant -in-aid @ 35% for General Areas and @ 50% for North East 
States, Himalayan States, ITDP Areas & Islands, of the total cost of plant & machinery and 
technical civil works will be provided. 

(b) For value addition and processing infrastructure including frozen storage/ deep freezers 
associated and integral to the processing, grant -in-aid @ 50% for General Areas and @ 75% for 
North East States, Himalayan States, ITDP Areas & Islands, will be provided. 

(c) For irradiation facilities grant -in-aid will be provided @ 50% for General Areas and @ 
75% for North East States, Himalayan States, ITDP Areas & Islands. 

Note: (i) Maximum grant -in-aid would be Rs. 10 crore per project.

107 (ii) The grant will be provided only in respect of technical civil works and eligible plant & 
machinery. 

(iii) Cost norms of Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH) issued by 
Department of Agriculture, Co-operation and Farmers Welfare will be followed wherever 
available. 

Eligibility: 

Integrated cold chain and value addition infrastructure projects can be set up by 
Partnership/Proprietorship Firms, Companies, Corporations, Cooperatives, Self Help Groups 
(SHGs), Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs), NGOs, Central/State PSUs, etc. with business 
interest in cold chain solutions and also by those who manage supply chain. 

Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: 
https://mofpi.nic.in/sites/default/files/guidelines_17.12.2019_cc_0.pdf 

 

 
10.4 Name of Scheme: Pradhan Mantri Kisan SAMPADA Yojana (Scheme for Agro - 
Marine Processing and Development of Agro -Processing Clusters) 
PM Kisan SAMPADA Yojana is a comprehensive package which will result in creation of 
modern infrastructure with efficient supply chain management from farm gate to retail outlet. It 
will not only provide a big boost to the growth of food processing sector in the country but also 
help in providing better returns to farmers and is a big step towards doubling of farmers income, 
creating huge employment opportunities especially in the rural areas, reducing wastage of 
agricultural produce, increasing the processing level and enhancing the export of the processed 
foods. 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement : 2017 
Objectives of the scheme: 
The objective of SAMPADA is to supplement agriculture, modernize processing and decrease 
agri-waste. 

Structure of Scheme:

108 The following schemes will be implemented under SAMPADA: 

(i). Mega Food Parks (on going) 

(ii). Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure (on going) 

(iii). Creation I Expansion of Food Processing & Preservation Capacities (new) 
(iv). Infrastructure for Agro -processing Clusters (new) 
(v). Creation of Backward and Forward Linkages (new) 

(vi). Food Safety and Quality Assurance Infrastructure (on going) 
(vii). Human Resources and Institutions (on going) 
1. Scheme for Mega Food Park 

(a) Objectives of the Scheme: The objectives of the scheme are as follows: 

i. To provide modern infrastructure for food processing units in the country. 

ii. To ensure value addition of agricultural produce including dairy, fisheries etc. 

iii. To establish a sustainable raw material supply chain for each cluster. 

iv. To facilitate induction of the latest technology. 

v. To address the need of small and micro food processing enterprises by providing plug & play 
facilities. 

vi. To provide an institutional mechanism for producers, processors, and retailers to work 
together to build the supply chain. 

(b) Pattern of financial assistance: 

Grant -in-aid @ 50% of eligible project cost in general areas and @ 75% of eligible project 
cost in NE Region and difficult areas subject to maximum of Rs.50 crore per project. 

(c) Implementing Agency: 

The Mega Food Park project is implemented by a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) which is a 
Body Corporate registered under the Companies Act. However, State Government, State 
Government entities and Cooperatives are not required to form a separate SPV under the revised 
guidelines. Possession of at least 50 acres of contiguous land by the SPV for the CPC with

109 conversion for industrial /infrastructure use is required. Subject to fulfilment of the conditions of 
Scheme Guidelines, the funds are released to the SPVs. 

2. Scheme for Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure 

(a) Objective of the Scheme: 

To arrest post -harvest losses of horticulture & non -horticulture produce by providing financial 
assistance in setting up integrated cold chain, preservation and value addition infrastructure 
facilities without any break from the farm gate to the consumer 

(b) Pattern of financial assistance: 

The scheme will continue to be implemented with same components with a revised pattern of 
financial assistance as follows: - 

(i) For storage infrastructure including pack houses, pre-cooling units, ripening chamber and 
transport infrastructure, grant -in-aid @ 35% for General Areas and @ 50% for North East 
States, Himalayan States, ITDP Areas & Island of the total cost of plant & machinery and 
technical civil works will be provided. 

(ii). For value addition and processing infrastructure including frozen storage/ deep freezers 
associated and integral to the processing, grant -in-aid @ 50% for General Areas and @ 75% for 
North East States, Himalayan States, ITDP Areas & Island will be provided. 

(iii). For irradiation facilities grant -in-aid will be provided @ 50% for General Areas and @ 75% 
for NE region and Difficult Areas. 

The maximum grant -in-aid per project would be Rs. 10 crore per project. 

Implementing agency: 

The integrated cold chain project is set up by Partnership/Proprietorship Firms, Companies, 
Corporations, Cooperatives, Self Help Groups (SHGs), Farmer Producer Organizations 
(FPOs),NGOs, Central/State PSUs, etc. 

3. Scheme for Creation I Expansion of Food Processing and Preservation Capacities a) 
Objectives of the scheme: The objectives of the scheme are as follows: 

(i) Creation/ expansion and / or modernization of processing / preservation capacities which will 
help in increasing the level of processing, value addition and thereby reduction of wastage. 

(ii) The setting up of new units and modernization/ expansion of existing unit will be covered 
under the scheme. The processing units undertake a wide range of processing activities

110 depending on the processing sectors which results in value addition and/or enhancing shelf life of 
the processed products. 

b) Pattern of financial assistance: 

The scheme envisages financial assistance to food processing units in the form of grant -in-aid: 

• 35% of the cost of Plant & machinery and technical civil works, subject to a maximum of Rs. 
5.00 crore in general areas. 

• 50% of the cost of Plant & machinery and technical civil works, subject to a maximum of Rs. 
5.00 crore in North East States and difficult areas. 

c) Implementing Agency: 

Scheme will be implemented through organizations such as Central & State PSUs / Joint 
Ventures / Farmer Producers Organization (FPOs)/ NGOs / Cooperatives / SHG's / Pvt. Ltd 
companies / individuals proprietorship firms engaged in establishment/ upgradation/ 
modernization of food processing units. 

4. Scheme for Infrastructurefor Agro Processing Clusters 

(a) Objectives: 

i. To create modern infrastructure for food processing closer to production areas. 

ii. To provide integrated and complete preservation infrastructure facilities from the farm gate to 
the consumer. 

iii. To create effective backward and forward linkages by linking groups of producers /farmers to 
the processors and markets through well-equipped supply chain. 

(b) Salient features of the scheme: 

(i) The scheme will have two basic components i.e. Basic Enabling Infrastructure (roads, water 
supply, power supply, drainage, ETP etc.) and Core Infrastructure/Common facilities (ware 
houses, cold storages, IQF, tetra pack, sorting, grading etc). Creation of common facilities in a 
cluster may vary depending upon requirements of food processing units existing outside the 
cluster or to be set up in a cluster. 

(ii) Minimum 5 food processing units with minimum investment of Rs. 25 crore will be set up in 
the cluster. 

(iii) Units will be set up simultaneous alongwith creation of common infrastructure.

111 (iv) Such infrastructure facilities may be developed by: 

a. The promoter(s) willing to set up own units in the cluster and also allow utilization of common 
infrastructure to other units in the area; 

b. The promoter(s) willing to develop common infrastructure for use by the units to be set up in 
the food processing cluster by other entrepreneurs; 

c. The promoter(s) willing to develop common infrastructure in the existing food processing 
clusters: 

(c) Components of the Scheme: 

The scheme aims at development of modern infrastructure to encourage entrepreneurs to set 
up food processing units based on cluster approach. Accordingly, the scheme will have 
following components: 

(i) Basic enabling infrastructure : It will include site development including development of 
industrial plots, boundary wall, roads, drainage, water supply, electricity supply including 
power backup, effluent treatment plant, parking bay, weigh bridges, common office space etc. 
However, the cost of basic enabling infrastructure not exceeding 40 percent of the eligible 
project cost would be eligible for grant purpose. 

(ii) Core infrastructure common facilities: The common facilities will be based on the 
needs of the units which will be set up in these clusters. The common facilities of capital 
intensive nature may include like testing laboratory, cleaning, grading, sorting and packing 
facilities, dry warehouse, cold storage, pre-cooling chambers, ripening chambers, steam 
generation boilers, IQF, specialized packaging, etc. 

The above mentioned facilities are only illustrative and the exact nature of facilities may 
vary from project to project based on requirements of the units in the cluster and surplus 
agriculture / horticulture produce in the catchment area of the project. 

(d) Implementing Agencies: 

All implementing agencies / organizations such as Govt. / PSUs / Joint Ventures / NGOs / 
Cooperatives / SHGs / FPOs / Private Sector / individuals etc. will be eligible for financial 
assistance under the scheme. 

(e) Pattern of Assistance: 

The maximum admissible grant for each project would be 35% of eligible project cost in general 
areas and 50% of eligible project cost in North East States and difficult areas subject to max. of 
Rs. 10.00 crore. The grants -in-aid will be credit linked but not back ended.

112 5. Scheme for Creation of Backward and Forward Linkages 

(a) Objectives: 

(i) To create an effective backward & forward linkages for perishable agri -horti produce through 
setting up of primary processing centres / collection centres at farm gate, distribution hub 
and retail outlets at the front end. 

(ii) To provide preservation facilities for enhancing shelf life of perishable agricultural 
produce resulting in better remunerative prices to farmers. 

(b) Salient features of the scheme: 

The Scheme is applicable to both perishable horticulture and non -horticulture produce such as: 
fruits, vegetables, dairy products and fish etc. 

(c) Components of the Scheme: 

The Scheme will have the following components: 

(i) Minimum Processing Facilities for perishable agri-horti produce at the farm level which 
may include facilities for weighing, cleaning, sorting, grading, packing, pre cooling, Controlled 
Atmosphere (CA)/ Modified Atmosphere (MA), Cold Storage, Dry Warehouses and IQF. 

(ii) Distribution hub and retail outlets for perishable agri-horti produce. 

(iii) Mobile Pre -cooling trucks and reefer trucks which may be suitable for transportation for 
perishable agri-horti produce.. 

The facilities mentioned above are illustrative only. The exact nature of infrastructure will be 
decided on the basis of surplus agriculture / horticulture produce in the catchment area of 
the project. 

(d) Implementing Agencies: 

All implementing agencies / organizations such as Govt. / PSUs / Joint Ventures / NGOs / 
Cooperatives / SHGs / FPOs / Private Sector / individuals etc. will be eligible for financial 
assistance under the scheme. 

(e) Pattern of Assistance: 

The maximum admissible grant for each project would be 35% of eligible project cost in 
general areas and 50% of eligible project cost North East States and difficult areas subject to 
max. of Rs. 5.00 crore. The grants-in-aid will be credit linked but not back ended.

113 6. Scheme for Food Safety and Quality Assurance Infrastructure 

(I) Setting up/Up -gradation of Quality Control/ Food Testing Laboratories 
a) Objectives: 

i. To establish a surveillance system for monitoring the quality and composition of food. 

ii. To analyse the samples received from processing industry and other stakeholders. 

iii. To reduce the time for analysis of samples by reducing transportation time of samples. 

iv. To ensure compliance of international and domestic standards on food in case of exports as 
well as imports. 

b) Pattern of assistance: 

Central/State Government and their organizations/ Government universities (including deemed 
universities) are eligible for Grant -in-aid @ 100% of the cost of equipment and all other 
implementing agencies/private sector organizations/universities (including deemed universities) 
are eligible for Grant -in-aid @ 50% of cost of equipment in general areas and @70% for 
North East & difficult areas respectively. Grant -in-aid is also given for Technical Civil Work 
and Furniture & Fixtures 

c) Implementing agencies: 

Central/State Government and their organizations/ Government universities (including deemed 
universities) and all other implementing agencies/private sector organizations/universities 
(including deemed universities). 

(II) Hazard Analysis & Critical Control Points (HACCP) / ISO Standards/Food 
safety/ Quality Management Systems 
(a) Objectives: 

The main objectives of the scheme are to motivate the food processing industry for adoption of 
food safety and quality assurance mechanisms such as TQM including ISO 9000, ISO 
22000, HACCP, GMP, GHP, to enable adherence to stringent quality and hygiene norms and 
thereby protect consumer health, enhance product acceptance by overseas buyers and keep 
Indian industry technologically abreast of international best practices. 

(b) Pattern of assistance: 

Grant -in-aid is given in the form of re -imbursement of expenditure towards implementation of 
HACCP/ ISO Standards / Food safety/ Quality Management Systems@ 50% in general area

114 and @ 75% in NE Region and difficult areas of eligible project cost subject to maxi mum of Rs. 
17 lakh and 22 lakh respectively. 

(c) Implementing Agencies: 

Central/State Government Organization, IITs, Universities and private sector in the field of 
food processing sector for implementation of HACCP/ ISO Standards / Food safety/ Quality 
Safety Management Systems 

7. Scheme for Human Resources and Institutions 

(I) Research & Development in Food Processing Sector 

(a) Objectives: 

The Objective of the scheme is that end product/outcome/findings of R&D work should 
benefit food processing industry in terms of product and process development, efficient 
technologies, improved packaging, value addition etc. with commercial value alongwith 
standardization of various factors viz. additives, colouring agents, preservatives, pesticide 
residues, chemical contaminants, microbiological contaminants and naturally occurring toxic 
substances within permissible limits. 

(b) Pattern of assistance: 

(i) For the Government organizations/universities/institutions: 

Grant -in-aid is given for 100% of cost of equipment, consumables and expenditure related to 
salaries for project staff specific to the project for maxi mum period of three years. Grant is 
released in three instalments. 

(ii) Funding pattern for Private organizations / universities / institutions 

Grant -in-aid is given to the tune of 50% of equipment cost only in general areas and 70% in 
North East States and difficult areas. Grant is released in three instalments. 

(c) Implementing Agencies: 

All Universities, IITs, Central/ State Government Institutions, Government Funded 
Organizations, R&D laboratories and CSIR recognized R&D Units in private sector are eligible 
to receive financial assistance for R&D projects under this scheme so as to improve the food 
processing sector. 

(II) Scheme for Promotional Activities, Advertisements, Publicity, Studies & 
Surveys

115 a) Objectives of the scheme: The objectives of the scheme are as follows: 

(i) To organize, co-sponsor, participate in all India level seminars, workshops, fairs and 
exhibitions for food processing sector to encourage investment in food processing and to 
create awareness of plan schemes being implemented by the ministry. 

(ii) To commission studies/ surveys to assess, evaluate various aspects of food processing 
sectors and allied activities. 
(iii) To create awareness about schemes of the ministry through print/audio -visual media 
through advertisements and publicity materials. 

(iv) To organize road shows, development of software and investor facilitation activities 
to promote food processing sector. 
b) Pattern of financial assistance: 

(i) Under the scheme component of Promotional Activities, for organizing all India level 
seminars, workshops, fairs and exhibitions for food processing sector grant in aid @ 50% of 
the cost of the event or maximum Rs. 5 lakhs would be provided. In case event is 
sponsored/ co -sponsored by the Ministry or where Ministry is participating directly through 
any designated apex agency or through its Institutes in domestic/international events, this limit 
would not apply. 

(ii) Under the scheme component of Studies/Surveys, the grant in aid shall be decided on 
merits of the proposal and nature of work to be executed or through bid process wherever 
applicable. 
(iii) Under the scheme component of Advertisement & Publicity, financial assistance will be 
provided on actual cost basis. The cost would be determined by following due procedure. 

c) ImplementingAgency: 

(i) Under the scheme component of Promotional Activities, for organizing all India level 
seminars, workshops, fairs and exhibitions will be implemented through apex industrial and trade 
bodies/associations. In some events sponsored/ co -sponsored by the Ministry or where Ministry 
is participating directly through any designated apex agency or through its Institutes in 
domestic/international events. 

(ii) Studies/ surveys would be commissioned by the Ministry, directly or through its 
organizations and boards or through selection of agency, after following due procedure.

116 (iii) Activities under the advertisements and publicity will be implemented by the Ministry 
through selection of agency, after following due procedure or through its Institutes. 

(III) Skill Development 

a) Objectives of the scheme: The objectives of the scheme are as follows: 

(i) to provide sector specific skilled workforce from floor level workers, operators, packaging 
and assembly line workers to quality control supervisor etc in the various sectors of food 
processing industries. 

(ii) to contribute towards achieving the projected skilled human resources requirement as 
envisaged by National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) in food processing sector i.e. 
17.8 million persons by the year 2022. 

The new scheme has been proposed in place of hither to be discontinued scheme of Human 
Resource Development. 

b) Pattern of financial assistance: 

(i) Development of course curriculum for training modules and its translation in English, Hindi 
and regional languages based on the qualification packs (QPs) validated by the NSDC as 
National Occupational Standards for different job roles in various sectors of food processing 
industries. Grant -in-aid would be available primarily to NIFTEM and IIFPT and also other 
eligible institutions to the extent of Rs.5 lakhs per QP for development of training module both 
in print and multimedia for each job role. Rs.0.50 lakh per QP would be available for the 
translation of already developed training modules in different languages for each job roles. 

(ii) Assistance for creation of infrastructure facilities for skill training centres. Grant in aid will 
also be provided at the rate of 50% of cost of plant & machineries required for training module 
subject to maximum of Rs. 15 lakh per training module and limited to two training modules per 
training centre. 

c) Implementing Agency: 

(i) The scheme of Development of course curriculum for training modules and its translation 
in English, Hindi and regional languages based on the qualification packs (QPs) validated by 
the NSDC will be implemented by National Institute of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship 
and Management (NIFTEM) and Indian Institute of Food Processing Technology (IIFPT) and 
also other eligible institutions.

117 (ii) The scheme for creation of infrastructure facilities for skill training centres will be 
implemented through food technology institutions under the UGC approved universities/ State 
universities and also NSDC recognized State owned skill training centres. 

(IV) Strengthening of Institutions 

(a) National Institute of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and Management 
(NIFTEM): 
The Ministry has established the NIFTEM at Kundli, District Sonepat, Haryana in May, 2012. 
NIFTEM has been declared a Deemed University under de novo category. NIFTEM is running 
the B. Tech., M. Tech. & Ph.D courses and undertakes R&D projects in the area of food 
technology. Under the scheme, funds will be provided to NIFTEM for creation of academic and 
administrative infrastructure like foreign student's hostel, sports facilities, hazardous chemical 
storage, effluent treatment plant, solid waste management system, residential units etc. Funds 
will also be provided to promote research activities, expand Village Adoption Program (VAP) 
and skill development in the food processing sector. An allocation of Rs. 100 crore has been 
made during the period of scheme. 

(b) Indian Institute of Food Processing Technology (IIFPT): 

The Ministry has upgraded IIFPT, Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu to a National level institute in 
February, 2008. IIFPT is running the B. Tech., M. Tech. & Ph.D courses and undertaking R&D 
projects in the area of food processing. Under the scheme funds will be provided to IIFPT for 
creation of infrastructure facilities including purchase of additional land (22.7 acres) for 
expanding campus and creation of academic and administrative infrastructure like machine 
fabrication and testing centre, sport complex, auditorium, opening training cum incubation 
centres and residential units etc. To enable the institute to expand its activities and programmes 
to meet the ever expanding need of food processing sector in the country, an allocation of Rs. 75 
crore has been made during the period of scheme. 

Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories 

 

For detail Information visit: http://www.mofpi.nic.in/sites/default/files/important_notice - 
sampada -19.05.2017.pdf

118 Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 

 
11.1 Name of Scheme: National Iodine Deficiency Disorders Control Programme 
(NIDDCP) 
The Salt iodisation programme in India dates back to late 50‟s when the classical study of 
Professor V. Ramalingaswamy and his associates in Kangra Valley of Himachal Pradesh 
established Iodine Deficiency as the causative factor for endemic goiter and consuming salt 
iodised with potassium iodate as the most economic and easiest means of its prevention and 
control in a population. Encouraged with the results of the experience gained in the Kangra 
Valley, Government of India launched the National Goiter Control Programme (NGCP) in 
1962.The Central Council of Health and Family Welfare in 1984 decided to implement 
compulsory iodisation of salt for human consumption in the entire country. The Programme 
started in a phased manner with effect from 1st April, 1986. The Programmed was also renamed 
in 1992 as National Iodine Deficiency Disorders Control Programmed (NIDDCP). 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 

Objectives of the scheme: 

Iodine is an essential micronutrient required for normal body growth and mental development. 
Nutritional Iodine Deficiency reckons its impact right from development of the foetus to all ages 
of human beings. It could result in abortion, stillbirth, mental retardation, deaf - mutism, squint, 
dwarfism, goitre, neuromotor defects etc. Iodine deficiency thus, directly affects human resource 
development which in turn greatly influences the human productivity as well as national 
development. 

National Iodine Deficiency Disorders Control Programme (NIDDCP) is being implemented in 
order to prevent, control and eliminate these disorders and to provide assistance to the States for 
setting up IDD Cell and IDD monitoring laboratories for ensuring quality control of iodated salt 
and for monitoring urinary iodine excretion. Surveys of IDD and health education activities are 
also supported through the Programme. 

The important objectives and components of National Iodine Deficiency Disorders Control 
Iodine Deficiency Disorders Control Programme (NIDDCP) are as follows: - 

• Surveys to assess the magnitude of the Iodine Deficiency Disorders. 

• Supply of iodated salt in place of common salt.

119 • Resurvey after every 5 years to assess the extent of Iodine Deficiency Disorders and the 
impact of iodated salt. 

• Laboratory monitoring of iodated salt and urinary iodine excretion. 

• Health education and Publicity. 

Salient features: 

It has been established that consumption of iodated salt is the best and simplest way to prevent 
and control IDD. Based on the recommendations of the Central Council of Health in 1984, the 
Government took a policy decision to iodate the entire edible salt in the country by 1992. The 
programme commenced in April 1986 in a phased manner. Since then our approch has been to 
enhance the production, demand and supply of iodated salt. The Central Government have issued 
the notification banning the sale of non -iodated salt for direct human consumption in the entire 
country with effect from 17th May, 2006 under the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act 1954. 

The Ministry of Health &. Family Welfare is the nodal Ministry for policy decisions on National 
Iodine Deficiency Disorders Control Programme (NIDDCP). The Central Nutrition and Iodine 
Deficiency Disorders Cell at the Directorate General of Health Services (DGHS) is responsible 
for the implementation of NIDDCP in the country. The important activities being undertaken by 
the IDD Cell of the Directorate General of Health Services are as follows: - 

1. Technical guidance to the States/UTs. 

2. Inter -sectoral co-ordination at Central level and maintenance of close liaison with the Ministry 
of Industry /Transport etc. 
3. Coordination of the various facets of NIOOCP in States/UTs 

4. Undertaking independent 100 surveys and monitoring in various States/UTs. 

5. Imparting training to the State Health Personnel, involved in NIOOCP. 

6. Collection, compilation and analysis of relevant data from States/UTs with a view to render 
more effective and meaningful advice. 

7. Monitoring of the quality control of iodated salt at production level through the Salt 
Commissioner and at the distribution and consumer level through the State Health Directorate. 

8. Monitoring the procurement and distribution of iodated salt in States/UTs. 

9. Managing the IEC activities at apex level.

120 10. Managing the financial and other physical aspects of State level 100 Cells. 

The Salt Commissioner's Office under the Ministry of Industry is responsible for licensing, 
production and distribution of iodated salt to States/UTs. This office is also responsible for 
monitoring the quality of iodated salt at production level and the distribution of the same in the 
country. The Salt Commissioner, in consultation with the Ministry of Railways, arranges for 
movement of iodated salt from the production centers to the States/UTs on a priority basis. 

For the effective implementation of NIDDCP, it was decided to establish independent IDD 
Control Cells in each State/UT Health Directorate during the Seventh Five year plan in phased 
manner. IDD Control Cell carries out periodic surveys regarding the prevalence of IDD and 
reports to D.G.H.S., Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. These State Cells coordinate with the 
Central IDD Cell at the Directorate General of Health Services. The State IDD cell is responsible 
for: 

1. Checking iodine levels of iodated salt with wholesalers and retailers within the State and 
coordinating with the Food and Civil Supplies Department. 
2. The distribution of iodated salt within the State through open market and public distribution 
system. 

3. Creating demand for iodated salt. 

4. Monitoring consumption of iodated salt. 

5. Conducting IDD surveys to identify the magnitude of IDD in various districts. · 

6. Conducting training. 

7. Dissemination of information, education and communication. 

Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: 
http://pbhealth.gov.in/Revised%20Policy%20Guidelines%20Govt.%20of%20India.pdf 

 
11.2 Name of Scheme: National Mental Health Program (NMHP) 

To address the huge burden of mental disorders and shortage of qualified professionals in the 
field of mental health, Government of India has been implementing National Mental Health 
Program (NMHP) since 1982. The district Mental Health Program was added to the Program in 
1996. The Program was re-strategized in 2003 to include two schemes, viz. Modernization of

121 State Mental Hospitals and Up -gradation of Psychiatric Wings of Medical Colleges/General 
Hospitals. The Manpower development scheme (Scheme -A & B) became part of the Program in 
2009. 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 1982 
Objectives of the scheme: 
• To ensure the availability and accessibility of minimum mental healthcare for all in the 
foreseeable future; 
• To encourage the application of mental health knowledge in general healthcare and in 
social development; 
• To promote community participation in the mental health service development; and 
• To enhance human resource in mental health sub-specialties. 

Structure of Scheme 

I. District and sub -district level activities under NHM: 

1. District Mental Health Program: 

a. Envisages provision of basic mental health care services at the community level: 

i. Service provision: provision of mental health out -patient & in -patient mental health services with 
a 10 bedded inpatient facility. 

ii. Out-Reach Component: 

• Satellite clinics: 4 satellite clinics per month at CHCs/ PHCs by DMHP team 
• Targeted Interventions: 
• Life skills education & counselling in schools, 
• College counselling services, 
• Work place stress management, and 
• Suicide prevention services 

iii. Sensitization & training of health personnel: at the district & sub -district levels 

iv. Awareness camps: for dissemination of awareness regarding mental illnesses and related stigma 
through involvement of local PRIs, faith healers, teachers, leaders etc 

v. Community participation:

122 • Linkages with Self -help groups, family and caregiver groups & NGOs working in the field of 
mental health 
• Sensitization of enforcement officials regarding legal provisions for effective implementation of 
Mental Health Act 

b. As of now, 241 districts have been covered under the scheme & it is proposed to expand DMHP 
to all districts in a phased manner (Annexure -II). Details provided in link below. 

c. Manpower (on contractual basis): Psychiatrist, Clinical Psychologist, Psychiatric Nurse, 
Psychiatric Social Worker, Community Nurse, Monitoring & Evaluation Officer, Case Registry 
Assistant, Ward Assistant/ Orderly 

d. Financial support @ Rs. 83.2 lakhs per DMHP 

2. PPP Model Activities (financial support @ Rs. 5 lakhs per NGO): 

Under this component, there is a provision for the state governments to execute activities related 
with mental health in partnership with Non-Government Organizations/Agencies as per the 
guidelines of the NRHM in this regard. The levels and the areas of partnership of the state 
government with the Non-Government Organizations/Agencies may be as follows: 

LEVELS AREAS OF PARTICIPATION 
District Local IEC, Day -care, Residential/Long -term Residential Continuing Care Centres, 
Supplementation or Innovative Mental Health Services, Training/Sensitization of 
health workers; Hiring of a private Psychiatrist/Clinical Psychologist/Psychiatric 
Social Worker/Psychiatric Nurse on contract. Psychiatrists @ Rs 2500/ - per day (ten 
days a month + 4 days/ month for outreach activity/training); Clinical 
Psychologists/Psychiatric Social Worker @Rs 2000/ - per day (ten days a month + 4 
days/ month for outreach activity/training); Psychiatric Nurse @Rs 1000/ - per day 
State Advocacy, Local IEC, Dedicated Mental Health Help -line, Training/Sensitization of 
health workers, Ambulance services. 

1. Day Care Centre (financial support @ 50,000 per centre per month): 

• Provides rehabilitation and recovery services to persons with mental illness so that the initial 
intervention with drug & psychotherapy is followed up and relapse is prevented. 
• Helps in enhancing the skills of the family/caregiver in providing better support care. 
• Provides opportunity for people recovering from mental illness for successful community living. 
• Financial support of Rs. 6.00 lakhs is earmarked per centre per year. 

2. Residential/ Long Term Continuing Care Centre (financial support @ 75,000 per centre 
per month):

123 • Chronically mentally ill individuals, who have achieved stability with respect to their symptoms 
& have not been able to return to their families and are currently residents of the mental 
hospitals, will be shifted to these centres. 
• Residential patients in these centres will go through a structured program which will be executed 
with the help of multidisciplinary team consisting of psychologists, social workers, nurses, 
occupational therapists, vocational trainers and support staff. 
• Financial support of Rs. 9.00 lakhs is earmarked per centre per year. 

3. Community Health Centres: 

i. Services available: 

• Outpatient services & inpatient services for emergency psychiatry patients; 
• Counselling services. 

ii. Manpower: 

• Medical Officer; 
• Clinical Psychologist or Psychiatric Social Worker 

4. Primary Health Centres: 

i. Services available: 

• Outpatient services; 
• Counselling services in accessing social care benefits; 
• Pro-active case findings and mental health promotion activities 

ii. Manpower: 

Community Health Workers (Two) 

5. Mental Health Services: 

• For those activities, state or district specific, which need to be added to the package of activities 
carried out by the district mental health team. 

Such mental health services will be delivered through government mental hospitals or medical 
colleges/hospitals with department of psychiatry. 

• Under the overall supervision of the Head of Psychiatry Department. 
• Financial support of up-to Rs. 15.00 lakhs per year per medical college/hospital/mental hospital 

6. Mental Health Helpline:

124 • A country wide 24 hours dedicated help -line to provide information to public on mental health 
resources, emergency situation and crisis management, information pertaining to destitute 
mentally ill patients, registration of complaints on Human Rights Violation of mentally ill and 
assistance on medico -legal issues. 

• Linked with district hospitals, medical college/hospitals, mental hospitals, private mental health 
facilities, NGOs and all other mental health service providers of the state. 

I. Tertiary level activities: 

1. Manpower Development Schemes (Centre of Excellence or Scheme -A & Scheme -B): 
Scheme A. Centres of Excellence in Mental Health 
• Up- gradation of 10 existing mental hospitals/ institutes/ Med. Colleges will be taken -up to start/ 
strengthen courses in psychiatry, clinical psychology, psychiatric social work & psychiatric 
nursing. 
• Financial Support of upto Rs. 33.70 cr will be provided to each centre and would include capital 
work (academic block, library, hostel, lab, supportive departments, lecture theatres etc.), 
equipments, faculty induction and retention during the plan period. 
• As of now, 15 mental health institutes have been funded for developing as Centres of Excellence 
in Mental Health (Annexure -I). 

Scheme B. PG Training Departments of Mental Health facilities 

• Government Medical Colleges/ Government Mental Hospitals will be supported for starting / 
increasing intake of PG courses in Mental Health. 
• Financial support of upto Rs. 0.86 to 0.99 cr per dept. would be provided. The support includes 
physical work for establishing /improving department in specialties of mental health, 
equipments, tools and basic infrastructure & for engaging required faculty for starting/ enhancing 
the PG courses. 
• Till date, 39 PG Departments in 15 Medical Colleges/ Mental Hospitals in mental health 
specialties viz. Psychiatry, Clinical Psychology, Psychiatric Nursing and Psychiatric Social 
Work have been provided support for their establishment /strengthening (Annexure -I) Details 
provided in link below. 

2. Up-gradation of two Central MH Institutes to provide Neurological and Neuro -surgical 
Facilities on the pattern of NIMHANS (CIP, Ranchi & LGB, Tezpur): 

• LGB Regional Institute of Mental Health, Tezpur and Central Institute of Psychiatry, 
Ranchi to be up-graded. 
• Basic Neurological & Neurosurgical facilities to be included on the pattern of 
NIMHANS.

125 • Support involves physical work for establishing departments in Neurology & 
Neurosurgery, equipments & tools and for engaging required faculty. 

3. Support to Central and State Mental Health Authorities: 

• Central Mental Health Authority (CMHA) & State Mental Health Authority (SMHA) are 
meant for regulation & co-ordination of mental health services under the central & state 
governments respectively. 
• Support to be provided for purchase of infrastructure (non -recurring) and Office and 
Professional Expenses (recurring). 
o Non-Recurring support to CMHA & each SMHA: Rs. 2.0 lakh 
o Recurring support to CMHA & each SMHA: Rs. 7.0 lakh 

4. Research & Survey: 

• For carrying out research & survey in different regions of the country in the field of 
mental health. 
• Help in understanding regional needs and framing plan and strategies in future for 
various parts of the country. 
• Budget for the remaining period is Rs. 18.00 cr (Rs. 6.00 cr per year). 

5. Monitoring & Evaluation: 

• Standard formats for recording and reporting have been developed and circulated. 
• These will be used by medical colleges/institutes (under Manpower Development 
Scheme), District, CHC and PHC. 
• Continuous evaluation of the activities of the program is being done. 

6. Central IEC: 

• The central level dedicated website will be introduced to provide on hands information 
on mental health resources, activities, plans, policy and programmes. 
• Extensive mass media activities will be supported at district and sub -district level. The 
support for TV /RADIO programs and innovative media campaigns on mental health in 
vernacular languages through local channels and other media. 

7. Central Mental Health Team: 

• A Central Mental Health Team would supervise and implement the programme and 
provide support to the Central Mental Health Authority. 
• Team would consist of one Consultant (Mental Health) with salary of Rs 70,000 pm, one 
Consultant (Public Health) with salary of Rs 60,000 pm, two Research Associates with salary of 
Rs 35,000 pm & one DEO with salary of Rs 15,000 pm. 
• Budget Provision for Central Mental Health Team for a period of 3 years is Rs 1.17 cr

126 8. Mental Health Information System: 

• An online data monitoring system and will also facilitate bilateral communication 
between participating units. 
• is expected to bring significant improvement in the implementation as there shall be 
possibility of mid course correction based on the feedback. 

9. Training/Workshops: 

• Trainings will be provided to master trainers from each state/UT who shall further train 
DMHP team and other staff working in the field of mental health. 
• Trainings will be standardised and delivered at identified centres. 
• The standardized training manuals are being formulated and circulated to all 
stakeholders. 
• Budget for the remaining Plan period is Rs. 15.00 cr (Rs. 5.00 cr per year). 

Eligibility: Persons with mental illness. 

Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: 
http://dghs.gov.in/content/1350_3_NationalMentalHealthProgramme.aspx 

 
11.3 Name of Scheme: National Leprosy Eradication Programme (NLEP) 

Since the inception of National Leprosy Eradication Programme (NLEP) in the year 1983 
spectacular success have been made in reducing the burden of Leprosy. The country achieved the 
goal of leprosy elimination as a public health problem. i.e. prevalence rate (PR) of less than 1 
case / 10,000 population at National level by December 2005, as set by National Health Policy 
2002. Although prevalence has come down at national and state level, new cases are being 
continuously detected and these cases will have to be provided quality leprosy services through 
GHC system. 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 1983 
Objectives of the scheme: 
a. Elimination of leprosy i.e. prevalence of less than 1 case per 10,000 population in all 
districts of the country.

127 b. Strengthen Disability Prevention & Medical Rehabilitation of persons affected by 
leprosy. 
c. Reduction in the level of stigma associated with leprosy. 

Salient features : 

• Diagnosis and treatment of leprosy - Services for diagnosis and treatment (Multi drug therapy) 
are provided by all primary health centres and govt. dispensaries throughout the country free of 
cost. Difficult to diagnose and complicated cases and cases requiring reconstructive surgery are 
referred to district hospital for further management. 
• Training - Training of general health staff like medical officer, health workers, health supervisors, 
laboratory technicians and ASHAs are conducted every year to develop adequate skill in 
diagnosis and management of leprosy cases. 
• Urban leprosy control - To address the complex problems in urban areas, the Urban Leprosy 
control activities are being implemented in urban areas having population size of more than 1 
lakh. These activities include MDT delivery services & follow up of patient for treatment 
completion, providing supportive medicines & dressing material and monitoring & supervision. 
• IEC- Intensive IEC activities are conducted for awareness generation and particularly reduction 
of stigma and discrimination against leprosy affected persons. These activities are carried 
through mass media, outdoor media, rural media and advocacy meetings. More focus is given on 
inter personnel communication. 
• NGO services under SET scheme - Presently, 43 NGOs are getting grants from Govt. of India 
under Survey, Education and Treatment (SET) scheme. The various activities undertaken by the 
NGOs are, IEC, Prevention of Impairments and Deformities, Case Detection and MDT Delivery. 
From financial year 2006 onwards, Grant -in-aid is being disbursed to NGO through State Health 
(Leprosy) Societies. 
• Disability Prevention and Medical Rehabilitation –For prevention of disability among persons 
with insensitive hands and feet, they are given dressing material, supportive medicines and 
micro -cellular rubber (MCR) footwear. The patients are also empowered with self-care 
procedure for taking care of themselves. More emphasis is being given on correction of disability 
in leprosy affected persons through reconstructive surgery (RCS). To strengthen RCS services, 
GOI has recognized 112 institutions for conducting RCS based on the recommendations of the 
state government. Out of these, 60 are Govt. institutions and 52 are NGO institutions. 
• Special Activity in High Endemic Distt. - 209 Districts had reported ANCDR (Annual New Case 
Detection Rate) more than 10 per lakh population. Special activity for early detection and 
complete treatment, Capacity building and extensive IEC, Adequate availability of MDT, 
Strengthening of distt. nucleus, Regular monitoring & supervision and review, Regular follow up 
for neuritis and reaction, Self care practices, Supply of MCR footwear in adequate quantity and 
Improvement in RCS performance through camp approach are planned in the above districts to 
reduce the disease burden.

128 • Supervision and Monitoring –Programme is being monitored at different level through analysis 
of monthly progress reports, through field visits by the supervisory officers and programme 
review meetings held at central, state and district level. For better epidemiological analysis of the 
disease situation, emphasis is given to assessment of New Case Detection and Treatment 
Completion Rate and proportion of grade II disability among new cases. Visit by Joint 
monitoring Teams with members from GOI, ILEP and WHO has been initiated from the year 
2012 -13 and to be continued annually. 

Initiatives: 

i. Involvement of ASHA – A scheme to involve ASHAs was drawn up to bring out leprosy cases 
from their villages for diagnosis at PHC and follow up cases for treatment completion. To 
facilitate involvement, they are being paid an incentive as below: 
o On confirmed diagnosis of case brought by them – Rs. 250/- 
o On completion of full course of treatment of the case within specified time – Pauci bacillary (PB) 
leprosy case – Rs. 400/ - and Multibacillary (MB) Leprosy case – Rs. 600/ -.The scheme has been 
extended to involve any other person who brings in or reports a new case of leprosy. 
o An early case before onset of any visible deformity – Rs 250 
o A new case with visible deformity in hands, feet or eye – Rs 200 

Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: 
https://dghs.gov.in/content/1349_3_NationalLeprosyEradicationProgramme.aspx 

 
11.4 Name of Scheme: Universal Immunisation Programme 

Immunization Programme in India was introduced in 1978 as „Expanded Programme of 
Immunization‟ (EPI) by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India. In 
1985, the programme was modified as „Universal Immunization Programme‟ (UIP) to be 
implemented in phased manner to cover all districts in the country by 1989 -90 with the one of 
largest health programme in the world. 

Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India provides several vaccines to 
infants, children and pregnant women through the Universal Immunisation Programme. 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 

Year of Commencement: 1985 

Salient features : Vaccines provided under UIP:

129 BCG 

• About -BCG stands for Bacillus Calmette -Guerin vaccine. It is given to infants to protect 
them from tubercular meningitis and disseminated TB. 

• When to give – BCG vaccine is given at birth or as early as possible till 1year of 

• Route and site- BCG is given as intradermal injection in left upper arm. 

OPV 

• About -OPV stands for Oral Polio Vaccine. It protects children from poliomylitis. 

• When to give - OPV is given at birth called zero dose and three doses are given at 6, 10 
and 14 weeks. A booster dose is given at 16-24 months of age. 

• Route and site - OPV is given orally in the form of two drops. 

Hepatitis B vaccine 

• About – Hepatitis B vaccine protects from Hepatitis B virus infection. 

• When to give - Hepatitis B vaccine is given at birth or as early as possible within 24 
hours. Subsequently 3 dose are given at 6, 10 and 14 weeks in combination with DPT and Hib in 
the form of pentavalent vaccine. 

• Route and site- Intramuscular injection is given at anterolateral side of mid thigh 

Pentavalent Vaccine 

• About -Pentavalent vaccine is a combined vaccine to protect children from five diseases 
Diptheria, Tetanus, Pertusis, Haemophilis influenza type b infection and Hepatitis B. 

• When to give - Three doses are given at 6, 10 and 14 weeks of age (can be given till one 
year of age). 

• Route and site -Pentavalent vaccine is given intramuscularly on anterolateral side of mid 
thigh 

Rotavirus Vaccine 

• About -RVV stands for Rotavirus vaccine. It gives protection to infants and children 
against rotavirus diarrhoea. It is given in select states. 

• When to give - Three doses of vaccine are given at 6, 10, 14 weeks of age.

130 • Route and site-5 drops of vaccine are given orally. 

PCV 

• About - PCV stands for Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccine. It protects infants and young 
children against disease caused by the bacterium Streptococcus pneumoniae. It is given in select 
states. 

• When to give - The vaccine is given as two primary doses at 6 & 14 weeks of age 
followed by a booster dose at 9 months of age 

• Route and site - PCV is given as intramuscular (IM) injection in outer right upper thigh. 
It should be noted that pentavalent vaccine and PCV are given as two separate injections into 
opposite thighs. 

fIPV 

• About - fIPV stands for Fractional Inactivated Poliomylitis Vaccine. It is used to boost 
the protection against poliomylitis. 

• When to give - Two fractional doses of IVP are given intradermally at 6 and 14 weeks of 
age. 

• Route and site- It is given as intradermal injection at right upper arm. 

Measles/ MR vaccine 

• About -Measles vaccine is used to protect children from measles. In few states Measles 
and Rubella a combined vaccine is given to protect from Measles and Rubella infection. 

• When to given - First dose of Measles or MR vaccine is given at 9 completed months 
to12 months (vaccine can be given up to 5 years if not given at 9-12 months age) and second 
dose is given at 16-24 months. 

• Route and site – Measles Vaccine is given as subcutaneous injection in right upper arm. 

JE vaccine 

• About - JE stands for Japanese encephalitis vaccine. It gives protection against Japanese 
Encephalitis disease. JE vaccine is given in select districts endemic for JE. 

• When to given - JE vaccine is given in two doses first dose is given at 9 completed 
months -12 months of age and second dose at 16-24 months of age. 

• Route and site- It is given as subcutaneous injection .

131 DPT booster 

• About -DPT is a combined vaccine; it protects children from Diphtheria, Tetanus and 
Pertussis. 

• When to give -DPT vaccine is given at 16 -24 months of age is called as DPT first 
booster and DPT 2nd booster is given at 5-6 years of age. 
• Route and site - DPT first booster is given as intramuscular injection in antero -lateral 
side of mid thigh in left leg. DPT second booster is given as intramuscular injection in left upper 
arm. 

TT 

• About - Tetanus toxoid vaccine is used to provide protection against tetanus. 

• When to give - Tetanus toxoid vaccine is given at 10 years and 15 years of age when 
previous injections of pentavalent vaccine and DPT vaccine are given at scheduled age. 

• Pregnant women -TT-1 is given early in pregnancy; and TT -2 is given 4 weeks after TT - 
1.TT booster is given when two doses of TT are given in a pregnancy in last three years. 
• Route and site- TT is given as Intramuscular injection in upper arm. 

 

Sl. No Vaccine & its 
presentation Protection Route Number of 
doses Vaccination 
Schedule 
 BCG (Bacillus 
Calmette Guerin) - 
Lyophilized vaccine Tuberculosis Intra - 
dermal 1 at birth (upto 1 year 
if not given earlier) 
 OPV (Oral Polio Poliomyelitis Oral 5 Birth dose for 
Vaccine) - Liquid institutional 
vaccine deliveries, Primary 
 three doses at 6, 10 
 & 14 week and one 
 booster dose at 16- 
 24 month of age. 
 Given orally 
 Hepatitis B – Liquid Hepatitis B Intra - 4 Birth dose (within 
Vaccine muscular 24 hours) for 
 institutional 
 deliveries, Primary 
 three doses at 6, 10 
 & 14 week.

132 DPT (Diphtheria, 
Pertussis and 
Tetanus Toxoid) – 
Liquid vaccine Diphtheria, 
Pertussis and 
Tetanus Intra - 
muscular 5 Three doses at 6, 10 
& 14 week and two 
booster dose at 16- 
24 month and 5-6 
years of age 
 Measles - 
Lyophilized vaccine Measles Sub- 
cutaneous 2 9-12 months of age 
and 2nd dose at 16 - 
24 months. 
 TT (Tetanus Toxoid) 
– Liquid vaccine Tetanus Intra - 
muscular 2 
2 10 years and 16 
years of Age. 
For pregnant 
woman, two doses 
given(one dose if 
previously 
vaccinated within 3 
Year) 
 JE vaccination (in 
selected high disease 
burden districts) 
Lyophilized vaccine Japanese 
Encephalitis 
(Brain fever) Sub- 
cutaneous 2 9-12 months of age 
and 2nd dose at 16 - 
24 months. 
 Hib (given as 
pentavalent 
containing 
Hib+DPT+Hep B) 
(in selected states) – 
Liquid vaccine Hib 
Pneumonia 
and Hib 
meningitis Intra - 
muscular 3 6, 10 & 14 week of 
age 

 

Eligibility : All children and pregnant women. To avail benefits in nearest 
government/PSU/Local body/Autonomous body health facility. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: https://mohfw.gov.in/sites/default/files/5628564789562315.pdf 

 

 
11.5 Name of Scheme: National Vector Borne Diseases Control Programme 

The National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme (NVBDCP) is an umbrella programme 
for prevention and control of Vector borne diseases. Earlier the Vector Borne Diseases were 
managed under separate National Health Programmes, but now NVBDCP covers all 6 Vector

133 borne diseases namely: 1. Malaria 2. Dengue 3. Chikungunya 4. Japanese Encephalitis 5. Kala - 
Azar 6. Filaria (Lymphatic Filariasis). 
Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2003 -04 
Structure of Scheme: 
1) National Anti - Malaria Programme 
Malaria is one of the serious public health problems in India. At the time of independence 
malaria was contributing 75 million cases with 0.8 million deaths every year prior to the 
launching of National Malaria Control Programme in 1953. A countrywide comprehensive 
programme to control malaria was recommended in 1946 by the Bhore committee report that 
was endorsed by the Planning Commission in 1951. The national programme against malaria has 
a long history since that time. In April 1953, Govt. of India launched a National Malaria Control 
Programme (NMCP). 
Objective: 

• To bring down malaria transmission to a level at which it would cease to be a major 
public health problem. 
2) Kala -Azar Control Programme 
Kala -azar or visceral leishmaniasis (VL) is a chronic disease caused by an intracellular protozoan 
(Leishmania species) and transmitted to man by bite of female phlebotomus sand fly. Currently, 
it is a main problem in Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal and some parts of Uttar Pradesh. In view 
of the growing problem planned control measures were initiated to control kala-azar. 
Objectives: 
The strategy for kala -azar control broadly included three main activities. 

• Interruption of transmission by reducing vector population through indoor residual 
insecticides. 
• Early diagnosis and complete treatment of Kala -azar cases; and 
• Health education programme for community awareness. 

3) National Filaria Control Programme 
Bancroftian filariasis caused by Wuchereria bancrofti, which is transmitted to man by the bites of 
infected mosquitoes - Culex, Anopheles, Mansonia and Aedes. Lymphatia filaria is prevalent in 
18 states and union territories. Bancroftian filariasis is widely distributed while brugian filariasis 
caused by Brugia malayi is restricted to 7 states - UP, Bihar, Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, Tamil 
Nadu, Kerala, and Gujarat. The National Filaria Control Programme was launched in 1955. The

134 activities were mainly confined to urban areas. However, the programme has been extended to 
rural areas since 1994. 
Objectives: 

• Reduction of the problem in un-surveyed areas 
• Control in urban areas through recurrent anti-larval and anti -parasitic measures. 

4) Japanese Encephalitis Control Programme 
Japanese encephalitis (JE) is a zoonotic disease and caused by an arbovirus, group B (Flavivirus) 
and transmitted by Culex mosquitoes. This disease has been reported from 26 states and UTs 
since 1978, only 15 states are reporting JE regularly. The case fatality in India is 35% which can 
be reduced by early detection, immediate referral to hospital and proper medical and nursing 
care. The total population at risk is estimated 160 million. The most disturbing feature of JE has 
been the regular occurrence of outbreak in different parts of the country. 
Govt. of India has constituted a Task Force at National Level which is in operation and reviews 
the JE situations and its control strategies from time to time. Though Directorate of National 
Anti-Malaria Programme is monitoring JE situation in the country. 
Objectives: 

• Strengthening early diagnosis and prompt case management at PHCs, CHCs and 
hospitals through training of medical and nursing staff. 
• IEC for community awareness to promote early case reporting, personal protection, 
isolation of amplifier host, etc.; 
• Vector control measures mainly fogging during outbreaks, space spraying in animal 
dwellings, and antilarval operation where feasible; and 
• Development of a safe and standard indigenous vaccine. Vaccination for high risk 
population particularly children below 15 years of age. 
5) Dengue And Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever 
One of the most important resurgent tropical infectious diseases is dengue . Dengue Fever and 
Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever (DHF) are acute fevers caused by four antigenically related but 
distinct dengue virus serotypes (DEN 1,2,3 and 4) transmitted by the infected mosquitoes, Aedes 
aegypti. Dengue outbreaks have been reported from urban areas from all states. All the four 
serotypes of dengue virus (1,2,3 and 4) exist in India. The Vector Aedes Aegypti breed in 
peridomestic fresh water collections and is found in both urban and rural areas. 
Objectives: 

• Surveillance for disease and outbreaks

135 • Early diagnosis and prompt case management 
• Vector control through community participation and social mobilization 
• Capacity building 

Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: www.nvbdcp.gov.in 

 

11.6 Name of Scheme: Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme (IDSP) 

Integrated Disease Surveillance Project (IDSP) is a decentralized, state based surveillance 
programme in the country. It is intended to detect early warning signals of impending outbreaks 
and help initiate an effective response in a timely manner. It is also expected to provide essential 
data to monitor progress of on -going disease control programmes and help allocate health 
resources more efficiently. 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2004 
Objectives of the scheme: 
To strengthen/maintain decentralized laboratory based IT enabled disease surveillance system for 
epidemic prone diseases to monitor disease trends and to detect and respond to outbreaks in early 
rising phase through trained Rapid Response Team (RRTs). 

Structure of Scheme: 

Integration is an important component of IDSP. The various aspects of Integration include: 
▪ Partnership between health and non-health sectors 
▪ Collaboration with private groups and NGO‟s 
▪ Sharing of disease surveillance data 
Components of surveillance: 
▪ Collection of data 
▪ Compiling of data 
▪ Data analysis and interpretation 
▪ Follow up action 
▪ Feedback

136 Types of surveillance under IDSP: 
▪ Syndromic diagnosis – by health worker / community workers – based on identification of a 
collection of symptoms 
▪ Presumptive diagnosis – by medical office based on history and clinical examination 
▪ Confirmed diagnosis – history and clinical examination by medical officer with laboratory 
testing 
Clinical syndromes under surveillance: 
▪ Fever – Malaria, Typhoid, Dengue, Japanese Encephalitis, Measles 
▪ lasting for less than 7 days without localising signs 
▪ with rash 
▪ with altered sensorium or convulsions 
▪ with bleeding from skin or mucous membrane 
▪ lasting for more than 7 days with or without localising signs 
▪ Cough lasting for more than 3 weeks – Tuberculosis 
▪ Acute flaccid paralysis – Polio 
▪ Diarrhoea – Cholera 
▪ Jaundice – Hepatitis, Malaria, Leptospirosis, Yellow fever 
▪ Unusual syndromes – Anthrax, Plague, Emerging epidemics 
Core conditions under surveillance: 
▪ Regular surveillance 
▪ Vector borne disease – malaria 
▪ Water borne disease – acute diarrhoeal disease, typhoid 
▪ Respiratory disease – Tuberculosis 
▪ Vaccine preventable disease – measles 
▪ Diseases under eradication – Polio 
▪ Other conditions – Road Traffic Accidents (linked with police computers) 
▪ International commitments – Plague 
▪ Unusual clinical syndromes – Meningoencephalitis, respiratory distress, haemorrhagic 
fevers 
▪ Sentinel surveillance 
▪ STD‟s – HIV, HBV, HCV

137 ▪ Water quality monitoring 
▪ Outdoor air quality monitoring (large cities) 
▪ Regular periodic surveys – for non communicable disease (NCD) risk factors 
▪ Anthropometry 
▪ Physical activity 
▪ Tobacco 
▪ Nutrition 
▪ Blood pressure 
▪ Additional state priorities – Each state may include up to 5 additional diseases based on 
local needs 
Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: 
http://www.idsp.nic.in/index1.php?lang=1&level=1&sublinkid=5768&lid=3697 

 
11.7 Name of Scheme: Janani Suraksha Yojana (JSY) 

Janani Suraksha Yojana (JSY) is a safe motherhood intervention under the National Rural Health 
Mission (NRHM) being implemented with the objective of reducing maternal and neo -natal 
mortality by promoting institutional delivery among the poor pregnant women. 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2005 
Objectives of the scheme: 
Reducing maternal and infant mortality by promoting institutional delivery among pregnant 
women. 

Salient features: 

The scheme focuses on the poor pregnant woman with special dispensation for states having low 
institutional delivery rates namely the states of Uttar Pradesh, Uttaranchal, Bihar, Jharkhand, 
Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Assam, Rajasthan, Orissa and Jammu and Kashmir. While these 
states have been named as Low Performing States (LPS), the remaining states have been named 
as High performing States (HPS).

138 Structure of Scheme: 

The Yojana has identified ASHA, the accredited social health activist as an effective link 
between the Government and the poor pregnant women in l0 low performing states, namely the 8 
EAG states and Assam and J&K and the remaining NE States. In other eligible states and UTs, 
wherever, AWW and TBAs or ASHA like activist has been engaged in this purpose, she can be 
associated with this Yojana for providing the services. 

Role of ASHA or other link health worker associated with JSY would be to: 

Identify pregnant woman as a beneficiary of the scheme and report or facilitate registration for 
ANC, 

• Assist the pregnant woman to obtain necessary certifications wherever necessary, 
• Provide and / or help the women in receiving at least three ANC checkups including TT 
injections, IFA tablets, 
• Identify a functional Government health centre or an accredited private health institution 
for referral and delivery, 
• Counsel for institutional delivery, 
• Escort the beneficiary women to the pre-determined health center and stay with her till 
the woman is discharged, 
• Arrange to immunize the newborn till the age of 14 weeks, 
• Inform about the birth or death of the child or mother to the ANM/MO, 
• Post natal visit within 7 days of delivery to track mother‟s health after delivery and 
facilitate in obtaining care, wherever necessary, 
• Counsel for initiation of breastfeeding to the newborn within one-hour of delivery and its 
continuance till 3-6 months and promote family planning. 

The mother and the ASHA (wherever applicable) should get their entitled money at the heath 
centre immediately on arrival and registration for delivery. 

Generally the ANM/ ASHA should carry out the entire disbursement process. However, till 
ASHA joins, AWW or any identified link worker, under the guidance of the ANM may also do 
the disbursement. 

Funding Pattern: 100% Central assistance. 

Eligibility: 

All pregnant women belonging to the Below Poverty Line (BPL) households and ST category. 
Under the JSY, eligible pregnant women are entitled for cash assistance irrespective of the age of

139 mother and number of children for giving birth in a government or accredited private health 
facility. 

Eligibility for Cash Assistance: 
LPS States All pregnant women delivering in Government health centres like Sub- 
centre, PHC/CHC/ FRU / general wards of District and state Hospitals or 
accredited private institutions 
HPS States BPL pregnant women, aged 19 years and above 
LPS & HPS All SC and ST women delivering in a government health centre like Sub- 
centre, PHC/CHC/ FRU / general ward of District and state Hospitals or 
accredited private institutions 

 
Scale of Cash Assistance for Institutional Delivery: 
Category Rural Area Total Urban Area Total 
 Mother‟s 
Package ASHA‟s 
Package Rs. Mother‟s 
Package ASHA‟s 
Package Rs. 
LPS 1400 600 2000 1000 400 1400 
HPS 700 600 1300 600 400 1000 

 
Cash assistance for home delivery: 

BPL pregnant women, who prefer to deliver at home, are entitled to a cash assistance of Rs. 500 
per delivery regardless of the age of pregnant women and number of children. 

Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: 
http://nhm.gov.in/images/pdf/programmes/jsy/guidelines/jsy_guidelines_2006.pdf 

 

 
11.8 Name of Scheme: National Programme for Prevention and Control of Deafness 
(NPPCD) 
Hearing loss is the most common sensory deficit in humans today. World over, it is the second 
leading cause for „Years lived with Disability (YLD)‟ the first being depression. There are large 
number of hearing impaired young people in India which amounts to a severe loss of 
productivity, both physical and economic. An even larger percentage of our population suffers 
from milder degrees of hearing loss and unilateral (one sided) hearing loss against the above 
background, The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India launched the pilot phase

140 of National Program for Prevention and Control of Deafness (from 2006 to 2008) in 10 States 
and 1 Union Territory in an effort to tackle the high incidence of deafness in the country , in 
view of the preventable nature of this disability. 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2006 
Objectives of the scheme: 
1. To prevent avoidable hearing loss on account of disease or injury. 

2. Early identification, diagnosis and treatment of ear problems responsible for hearing loss and 
deafness. 

3. To medically rehabilitate persons of all age groups, suffering with deafness. 

4. To strengthen the existing inter-sectoral linkages for continuity of the rehabilitation 
programme, for persons with deafness. 

5. To develop institutional capacity for ear care services by providing support for equipment, 
material and training personnel. 
Long term objective: To prevent and control major causes of hearing impairment and deafness, 
so as to reduce the total disease burden by 25% of the existing burden by the end of 12th Five 
Year Plan. 

Structure of Scheme: 

1) Manpower training and development – For prevention, early identification and 
management of hearing impaired and deafness cases, training would be provided from medical 
college level specialists (ENT and Audiology) to grass root level workers. 

2) Capacity building – for the district hospital, community health centers and primary health 
center in respect of ENT/ Audiology infrastructure. 

3) Service provision –Early detection and management of hearing and speech impaired cases and 
rehabilitation, at different levels of health care delivery system. 

4) Awareness generation through IEC/BCC activities – for early identification of hearing 
impaired, especially children so that timely management of such cases is possible and to remove 
the stigma attached to deafness.

141 EXPECTED BENEFITS OF THE PROGRAMME: 

The Programme is expected to generate the following benefits :- 

i. Availability of various services like prevention, early identification, treatment, referral, 
rehabilitation etc. for hearing impairment and deafness as the primary health center / community 
health centers / district hospitals largely cater to their need. 

ii. Decrease in the magnitude of hearing impaired persons. 

iii. Decrease in the severity/ extent of ear morbidity or hearing impairment. 

iv. Improved service network/referral system for the persons with ear morbidity/hearing 
impairment. 

v. Awareness creation among the health workers/grassroot level workers through the primary 
health centre medical officers and district health officers, which will percolate to the lower level 
health workers functioning within the community. 

vi. Capacity building at the district hospitals to ensure better care. 

Funding Pattern: 

The Programme was a 100% Centrally Sponsored Scheme during 11th Five Year Plan. However, 
in as per the 12th Five Year Plan, the Centre and the States will have to pool in resources 
financial norms of NRHM mutas mutandis. 
Eligibility: Hearing impaired persons. 

Area of Operation : 

The Programme was initiated in year 2007 on pilot mode in 25 districts of 11 State/UTs. The 
Programme has been expanded to 192 districts of 20 States/UTs. In the 12th Plan, it is proposed 
to expand the Programme to additional 200 districts in a phased manner probably covering all 
the States and Union territories by March, 2017. 

For detail Information visit: 
http://mohfw.nic.in/sites/default/files/51892751619025258383Operational%20Guidlines%20fo 
r%2012th%20Plan.pdf

142 11.9 Name of Scheme: Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY) 

Social Security and healthcare assurance for all has been the motto of Government of India, and 
it has taken various steps in this regard. One of the most important policy milestones is the 
Unorganized Workers Social Security Act (2008) enacted by the Central Government to provide 
for the social security and welfare of the unorganized workers. This act recommends that the 
Central Government provide social security schemes to mitigate risks due to disability, health 
shocks, maternity and old age which all unorganized workers get exposed to and are likely to 
suffer from. In India more than two thirs of expenditure on health is through Out of Pocket 
(OOP) which is the most ineficient and least accountable way of spending on health. Suppy side 
financing on health alone has not been found to be successful in reducing OOP expenditure on 
health substantially and therefore, to test the demand side financing approach, Government of 
India, decided to introduce Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY) a Health Insurance 
Scheme for the Below Poverty Line families with the objectives to reduce OOP expenditure on 
health and increase access to health care 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2008 
Objectives of the scheme: 
The main objective of RSBY scheme is to provide the enrolled beneficiaries from the 
unorganized sector with a health insurance cover, thereby protecting them from the financial 
shocks arising out of an emergency medical situation. It aims to reduce the out of pocket 
expenses of the target population for every visit to hospital. 

Salient features: 

The beneficiary shall be eligible for such in - patient health care insurance benefits as would be 
designed by the respective State Governments based on the requirement of the people/ 
geographical area. However, the State Governments are advised to incorporate at least the 
following minimum benefits in the package / scheme: 
• The unroganised sector worker and his family (unit of five) will be covered. 
• Total sum insured would be Rs. 30,000/ - per family per annum on a family floater basis. 
• Cashless attendance to all covered ailments 
• Hospitalization expenses, taking care of most common illnesses with as few exclusions as 
possible 
• All pre-existing diseases to be covered 
• Transportation costs (actual with maximum limit of Rs. 100 per visit) within an overall 
limit of Rs. 1000. 
Funding Pattern:

143 • Contribution by Government of India: 75% of the estimated annual premium of Rs. 750, 
subject to a maximum of Rs. 565 per family per annum. The cost of smart card will be 
borne by the Central Government. 
• Contribution by respective State Governments: 25% of the annual premium, as well as 
any additional premium. 
• The beneficiary would pay Rs. 30 per annum as registration/renewal fee. 
• The administrative and other related cost of administering the scheme would be borne by 
the respective State Governments 
Eligibility: 

• Unorganized sector workers belonging to BPL category and their family members (a 
family unit of five) shall be the beneficiaries under the scheme. 
• It will be the responsibility of the implementing agencies to verify the eligibility of the 
unorganized sector workers and his family members who are proposed to be benefited 
under the scheme. 
• The beneficiaries will be issued smart cards for the purpose of identification. 
Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories. 

For detail Information visit: https://www.india.gov.in/spotlight/rashtriya -swasthya -bima - 
yojana#rsby2 

 

 
11.10 Name of Scheme: National Programme for Prevention and Control of Cancer, 
Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke (NPCDCS) 

States have already initiated some of the activities for prevention and control of non 
communicable diseases (NCDs) especially cancer, diabetes , CVDs and stroke. The Central Govt. 
proposes to supplement their efforts by providing technical and financial support through 
National Program for Prevention and Control of Cancer, Diabetes, CVD and Stroke ( NPCDCS). 
The NPCDCS program has two components viz. (i) Cancer (ii) Diabetes, CVDs and Stroke. 
These two components have been integrated at different levels as far as possible for optimal 
utilization of the resources. The activities at State, Districts, CHC and Sub Centre level have 
been planned under the programme and will be closely monitored through NCD cell at different 
levels. 
The NPCDCS aims at integration of NCD (non -communicable diseases) interventions in the 
NRHM framework for optimization of scarce resources and provision of seamless services to the 
end customer / patients as also for ensuring long term sustainability of interventions. Thus, the 
institutionalization of NPCDCS at district level within the District Health Society, sharing 
administrative and financial structure of NRHM becomes a crucial programme strategy for 
NPCDCS. The NCD cell at various levels will ensure implementation and supervision of the

144 programme activities related to health promotion, early diagnosis, treatment and referral, and 
further facilitates partnership with laboratories for early diagnosis in the private sector. 
Simultaneously, it will attempt to create a wider knowledge base in the community for effective 
prevention, detection, referrals and treatment strategies through convergence with the ongoing 
interventions of National Rural Health Mission (NRHM), National Tobacco Control Programme 
(NTCP), and National Programme for Health Care of Elderly (NPHCE) etc and build a strong 
monitoring and evaluation system through the public health 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2010 
Objectives of the scheme: 
I. Health promotion through behavior change with involvement of community, civil society, 
community based organizations, media etc. 
II. Opportunistic screening at all levels in the health care delivery system from subcentre and 
above for early detection of diabetes, hypertension and common cancers. Outreach camps are 
also envisaged. 
III. To prevent and control chronic Non -Communicable diseases, especially Cancer, Diabetes, 
CVDs and Stroke. 
IV. To build capacity at various levels of health care for prevention, early diagnosis, treatment, 
IEC/BCC, operational research and rehabilitation. 
V. To support for diagnosis and cost effective treatment at primary, secondary and tertiary levels 
of health care. 
VI. To support for development of database of NCDs through Surveillance System and to 
monitor NCD morbidity and mortality and risk factors. 
Salient features 
The strategies for prevention, control and treatment of cancer, diabetes, CVDs and stroke would 
have following components: 
• Health promotion, awareness generation and promotion of healthy lifestyle 

• Screening and early detection 

• Timely, affordable and accurate diagnosis 

• Access to affordable treatment,

145 • Rehabilitation Under the 12th FYP, while the coverage is proposed to be pan - India, the focus 
of the programme is on health promotion, prevention, detection, treatment and rehabilitative 
services at decentralized level up to district hospital under the overall umbrella of National 
Health Mission for primary and secondary level health care services. Tertiary care services are 
being dealt separately. The programme division at the national level will develop broad 
guidelines and strategy for implementation of different components of the programme. The 
States may adopt and modify these guidelines as per their need and circumstances for 
implementation of the programme. Involvement of community, civil society and private sector 
partnership would be vital, and suitable guidelines would be made for the same. 
Funding Pattern 

The Centre & State share will be 75:25 except for North East & Hilly States where Share will be 
90:10 . 
Eligibility: All men and women over 30 years of age. 

Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: 
https://main.mohfw.gov.in/sites/default/files/Operational%20Guidelines%20of%20NPCDCS% 
20%28Revised%20 -%202013 -17%29_1.pdf 

 

 
11.11 Name of Scheme: National Programme for Health Care of the Elderly (NPHCE) 
The National Programme for Health Care of the Elderly (NPHCE) is an articulation of the 
International and national commitments of the Government as envisaged under the UN 
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD), National Policy on Older 
Persons (NPOP) adopted by the Government of India in 1999 and Section 20 of “The 
Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007” dealing with provisions for 
medical care of Senior Citizen. 
Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2010 -11 
Objectives of the scheme: 
• To provide an easy access to promotional, preventive, curative and rehabilitative services to the 
elderly through community based primary health care approach

146 • To identify health problems in the elderly and provide appropriate health interventions in the 
community with a strong referral backup support. 
• To build capacity of the medical and paramedical professionals as well as the care -takers within 
the family for providing health care to the elderly. 
• To provide referral services to the elderly patients through district hospitals, regional medical 
institutions 
• Convergence with National Rural Health Mission, AYUSH and other line departments like 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. 
Structure of Scheme 
In the programme, it is envisaged providing promotional, preventive, curative and rehabilitative 
services in an integrated manner for the Elderly in various Government health facilities. The 
package of services would depend on the level of health facility and may vary from facility to 
facility. The range of services will include health promotion, preventive services, diagnosis and 
management of geriatric medical problems (out and in -patient), day care services, rehabilitative 
services and home based care as needed. Districts will be linked to Regional Geriatric Centres 
for providing tertiary level care. The services under the programme would be integrated below 
district level and will be integral part of existing primary health care delivery system and vertical 
at district and above as more specialized health care are needed for the elderly. 

 
Health Facility Packages of services 
Sub-centre • Health Education related to healthy ageing 
• Domiciliary visits for attention and care to home bound / 
bedridden elderly persons and provide training to the family 
care providers in looking after the disabled elderly persons. 
• Arrange for suitable callipers and supportive devices from the 
PHC to the elderly disabled persons to make them ambulatory. 
• Linkage with other support groups and day care centres etc. 
Operational in the area 
Primary Health 
Centre • Weekly geriatric clinic run by a trained Medical Officer 
• Maintain record of the Elderly using standard format during their 
first visit 
• Conducting a routine health assessment of the elderly persons 
based on simple clinical examination relating to eye, BP, blood 
sugar, etc. 
• Provision of medicines and proper advice on chronic ailments 
• Public awareness on promotional, preventive and rehabilitative 
aspects of geriatrics during health and village sanitation 
day/camps. 
• Referral for diseases needing further investigation and treatment,

147 to Community Health Centre or the District Hospital as per need. 
Community Health 
Centre • First Referral Unit (FRU) for the Elderly from PHCs and below. 
• Geriatric Clinic for the elderly persons twice a week. 
• Rehabilitation Unit for physiotherapy and counselling 
• Domiciliary visits by the rehabilitation worker for bed ridden 
elderly and counselling of the family members on their home - 
based care. 
• Health promotion and Prevention 
• Referral of difficult cases to District Hospital/higher health care 
facility 
District Hospital • Geriatric Clinic for regular dedicated OPD services to the Elderly. 
• Facilities for laboratory investigations for diagnosis and provision 
of medicines for geriatric medical and health problems 
• Ten-bedded Geriatric Ward for in-patient care of the Elderly 
• Existing specialities like General Medicine; Orthopaedics, 
Ophthalmology; ENT services etc. will provide services needed by 
elderly patients. 
• Provide services for the elderly patients referred by the 
CHCs/PHCs etc 
• Conducting camps for Geriatric Services in PHCs/CHCs and other 
sites 
• Referral services for severe cases to tertiary level hospitals 
Regional Geriatric 
Centre • Geriatric Clinic (Specialized OPD for the Elderly) 
• 30-bedded Geriatric Ward for in -patient care and dedicated beds 
for the elderly patients in the various specialties viz. Surgery, 
Orthopedics, Psychiatry, Urology, Ophthalmology, Neurology etc. 
• Laboratory investigation required for elderly with a special sample 
collection centre in the OPD block. 
• Tertiary health care to the cases referred from medical colleges, 
district hospitals and below 

 
Funding Pattern 

The Centre will bear 80% of the total budget and the State Government will contribute 20% of 
the budget, for activities up to district level. 
Eligibility: All elderly People (above 60 Years). 

Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: 
https://main.mohfw.gov.in/sites/default/files/8324324521Operational_Guidelines_NPHCE_fin 
al.pdf

148 11.12 Name of Scheme: Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakram (JSSK) 

In view of the difficulty being faced by the pregnant women and parents of sick new - born along -
with high expenditure on delivery and treatment of sick - new-born, Ministry of health and 
Family Welfare (MoHFW) has taken a major initiative to ensure better facilities for women and 
child health services. 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2011 
Objectives of the scheme: 
It is an initiative to provide completely free and cashless services to pregnant women including 
normal deliveries and caesarean operations and sick new born (up to 30 days after birth) in 
Government health institutions in both rural & urban areas. 

Salient features: 

The initiative entitles all pregnant women delivering in public health institutions to absolutely 
free and no expense delivery, including caesarean section. 
The entitlements include free drugs and consumables, free diet up to 3 days during normal 
delivery and up to 7 days for C -section, free diagnostics, and free blood wherever required. This 
initiative also provides for free transport from home to institution, between facilities in case of a 
referral and drop back home. Similar entitlements have been put in place for all sick newborns 
accessing public health institutions for treatment till 30 days after birth. This has now been 
expanded to cover sick infants: 

The scheme aims to eliminate out of pocket expenses incurred by the pregnant women and sick 
new borne while accessing services at Government health facilities. 
• The scheme is estimated to benefit more than 12 million pregnant women who access 
Government health facilities for their delivery. Moreover it will motivate those who still choose 
to deliver at their homes to opt for institutional deliveries. 

The following are the Free Entitlements for pregnant women: 

• Free and cashless delivery 

• Free C-Section 

• Free drugs and consumables

149 • Free diagnostics 

• Free diet during stay in the health institutions 

• Free provision of blood 

• Exemption from user charges 

• Free transport from home to health institutions 

• Free transport between facilities in case of referral 

• Free drop back from Institutions to home after 48hrs stay 

The following are the Free Entitlements for Sick newborns till 30 days after birth. This has 
now been expanded to cover sick infants: 
• Free treatment 

• Free drugs and consumables 

• Free diagnostics 

• Free provision of blood 

• Exemption from user charges 

• Free Transport from Home to Health Institutions 

• Free Transport between facilities in case of referral 

• Free drop Back from Institutions to home 

Eligibility: Pregnant women and sick new born (up to 30 days after birth). 

Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: 
http://nhm.gov.in/images/pdf/programmes/jssk/guidelines/guidelines_for_jssk.pdf

150 11.13 Name of Scheme: National Health Mission (NHM) 

The National Health Mission (NHM) seeks to provide universal access to equitable, affordable 
and quality health care which is accountable, at the same time responsive, to the needs of the 
people, reduction of child and maternal deaths as well as population stabilization, gender and 
demographic balance. 
Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2013 
Objectives of the scheme: 
i. Reduction in child and maternal mortality 
ii. Prevention and control of communicable and non-communicable diseases, including locally 
endemic diseases. 
iii. Access to integrated comprehensive primary health care. 
iv. Population stabilisation, gender and demographic balance. 
v. Revitalize local health traditions & mainstream AYUSH. 
vi. Universal access to public services for food and nutrition, sanitation and hygiene and 
universal access to public health care services with emphasis on services addressing women‟s 
and children‟s health and universal immunisation. 
vii. Promotion of healthy life styles. 
Salient features 

The National Health Mission (NHM) encompasses its two Sub-Missions, the National Rural 
Health Mission (NRHM) and the National Urban Health Mission (NUHM). 
NHM has six financing components: 
1. NRHM -RCH Flexipool 
2. NUHM Flexipool 
3. Flexible pool for Communicable disease 
4. Flexible pool for Non communicable disease including Injury and Trauma 
5. Infrastructure Maintenance and 
6. Family Welfare Central Sector component 

The main programmatic components include 
1. Health System Strengthening in rural and urban areas 
2. Reproductive -Maternal - Neonatal -Child and Adolescent Health (RMNCH+A) 
3. Communicable and Non-Communicable Diseases. 

Under NHM, support to States/UTs is provided for five key programmatic components:

151 (i) Health Systems Strengthening including infrastructure, human resource, drugs & 
equipment, ambulances, MMUs, ASHAs etc under National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) 
and National Urban Health Mission (NUHM). 
(ii) Reproductive, Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health Services (RMNCH + A) 
(iii) Communicable Disease Control Programmes 
(iv) Non-Communicable Diseases Control Programme interventions upto District Hospital level 
(v) Infrastructure Maintenance - to support salary of ANMs and LHVs etc. 

Targets as per NHM Framework for Implementation 

Sl.no. Targets (2012 -17) Achievements 
1 Reduce IMR to 25/1000 live births IMR has reduced to 37 in 2015 (SRS). 

2 
Reduce MMR to 100/1,00,000 live births MMR has reduced to 167 in 2011 -13 
(SRS). 
3 Reduce TFR to 2.1 TFR has reduced to 2.3 in 2014 (SRS). 

 

 

4 

 

Reduce annual prevalence and mortality from 
Tuberculosis by half Tuberculosis Prevalence and mortality 
reduced to half as compared to 1990 
level. 

Incidence reduced from 300 / lakh in 
1990 to 217/ lakh in 2015 

Mortality reduced from 76/ lakh in 
1990 to 32/ lakh in 2015 

Data Source : WHO Global TB report 
2016 

5 Reduce prevalence rate of Leprosy to 
<1/10000 population in all districts. Prevalence rate of Leprosy reduced to 
Less than 1/10000 population in 551 
Districts as on 31st March 2016. 

6 
Annual Malaria Incidence to be <1/1000 Annual Malaria Incidence is 0.67 in 
2016.(Prov) 

7 Less than 1 per cent microfilaria prevalence 
in all districts Out of 256 LF endemic districts, 222 
districts have reported Mf rate less than 
1% as per reports of 2016. 

8 Kala -Azar Elimination by 2015, <1 case per 
10000 population in all blocks Out of 628 endemic blocks 492 (78%) 
have already achieved elimination till 
2016.

152 Funding Pattern 

Funding pattern is through flexible pools, viz., NRHM -RCH Flexible Pool, NUHM Flexible 
Pool, Flexible pool for Communicable Diseases, Flexible Pool for Non -communicable Diseases, 
Injury and Trauma and Infrastructure maintenance schemes. 
Eligibility: Rural and Urban Areas. 

Area of Operation 
All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: http://nhm.gov.in/nhm/about -nhm.html 

 

 
11.14 Name of Scheme: Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram (RBSK) 
Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram was launched in February 2013. It is technically called 
‘Child Health Screening and Early Intervention Services’ . This programme has been launched 
under National Rural Health Mission initiated by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. 
Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2013 
Objectives of the scheme: 
Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram (RBSK) is an important initiative aiming at early 
identification and early intervention for children from birth to 18 years to cover 4 „D‟s viz. 
Defects at birth, Deficiencies, Diseases, Development delays including disability. 
Salient features: 

The Operational Guidelines outline the following mechanism to reach all the target groups of 
children for health screening 
For new born: Facility -based newborn screening at public health facilities, by existing health 
manpower & Community based newborn screening at home through ASHAs for newborn till 6 
weeks of age during home visitation. 
For children 6 weeks to 6 years: Anganwadi Center based screening by the dedicated Mobile 
Health Teams. 
For children 6 years to 18 years : Government and Government aided school based screening by 
dedicated Mobile Health Teams.

153 Facility based newborn screening This includes screening of birth defects in institutional 
deliveries at public health facilities, especially at the designated delivery points by ANMs, 
Medical Officers/ Gynaecologists. Existing health service providers at all designated delivery 
points will be trained to detect, register report and refer birth defects to the District Early 
Intervention Centers in District Hospitals. 
Community Based Newborn Screening (age 0-6 weeks) for Birth Defect 
Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHAs) during home visits for newborn care will use the 
opportunity to screen the babies born at home and the institutions till six weeks of age. ASHAs 
will be trained with simple tools for detecting gross birth defects. Further ASHAs will mobilise 
caregivers of children to attend the local Anganwadi Centers for screening by the dedicated 
Mobile Health Team. 
In order to ensure improved and enhanced outcome of the screening programme by Mobile 
Health Teams, ASHAs would particularly mobilise the children with low birth weight, 
underweight and children from households known to have any chronic illness (e.g., tuberculosis, 
HIV,haemoglobinopathy etc.). Line lists maintained by the ANMs and AWWs would also be 
used to mobilise children. 
Screening of Children Aged 6 Weeks till 6 Years Attending Anganwadi Centers 
Children in the age groups six weeks to six years of age will be examined in the Anganwadi 
Centers by the dedicated Mobile Health Teams. 
Screening of Children Enrolled in Government and Government aided schools 
For children in the age groups 6 to 18 years, who will be screened in Government and 
Government -aided schools, the Block will be the hub of activity for the programme. At least 
three dedicated Mobile Health Teams in each Block will be engaged to conduct screening of 
children. Villages within the jurisdiction of the Block would be distributed amongst the mobile 
health teams. The number of teams may vary depending on the number of Anganwadi Centers, 
difficult -to-reach areas and children enrolled in the schools. The screening of children in the 
Anganwadi Centers would be conducted at least twice a year and at least once a year for school 
children to begin with. 
There is also a provision for engaging a Block Programme Manager for providing logistic 
support and for monitoring the entire health screening process. The Block Programme Manager 
is also expected to ensure referral support and manage compilation of the data. The Block teams 
will work under the overall guidance and supervision of the CHC Medical Officer. The Block 
Programme Manager will chalk out a detailed screening plan for all the three teams in 
consultation with schools, Anganwadi Centers and CHC Medical Officer. 
District Early Intervention Center (DEIC) 
An Early Intervention Center will be established at the District Hospital. The purpose of Early 
Intervention Center is to provide referral support to children detected with health conditions 
during health screening. A team consisting of Paediatrician, Medical officer, Staff Nurses, 
Paramedics will be engaged to provide services. There is also a provision for engaging a

154 manager who would carry out mapping of tertiary care facilities in Government institutions for 
ensuring adequate referral support. The funds will be provided under NRHM for management at 
the tertiary level at the rates fixed by the State Governments in consultation with the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare. 
Children and students presumptively diagnosed to have a disease/ deficiency/disability/ defect 
and who require confirmatory tests or further examination will be referred to the designated 
tertiary level public sector health facilities through the DEICs. 
The DEIC would promptly respond to and manage all issues related to developmental delays, 
hearing defects, vision impairment, neuro -motor disorders, speech and language delay, autism 
and cognitive impairment. Beside this, the team at DEICs will also be involved in newborn 
screening at the District level. This Center would have the basic facilities to conduct tests for 
hearing, vision, neurological tests and behavioural assessment. 
The States/UTs would conduct mapping to identify public health institutions through 
collaborative partners for provision of specialized tests and services. Private sector partnership/ 
NGOs providing specialised services can also be explored in case services at public health 
institutions providing tertiary care are not available. Accredited health institutions will be 
reimbursed for the specialised service provided as per the agreed cost of tests or treatment 
packages. 
Health conditions to be screened: 
Child Health Screening and Early Intervention Services under RBSK envisages to cover 30 
selected health conditions for Screening, early detection and free management. States and UTs 
may also include diseases namely hypothyroidism, Sickle cell anaemia and Beta 
Thalassemia based on epidemiological situation and availability of testing and specialized 
support facilities within State and UTs. 

Selected Health Conditions for Child Health Screening & Early Intervention Services 
Defects at Birth Deficiencies 
1. Neural tube defect 
2. Down's Syndrome 
3. Cleft Lip & Palate / Cleft palate 
alone 
4. Talipes (club foot) 
5. Developmental dysplasia of the hip 
6. Congenital cataract 
7. Congenital deafness 
8. Congenital heart diseases 
9. Retinopathy of Prematurity 10. Anaemia especially Severe anaemia 
11. Vitamin A deficiency (Bitot spot) 
12. Vitamin D Deficiency, (Rickets) 
13. Severe Acute Malnutrition 
14. Goiter 
Diseases of Childhood Developmental delays and Disabilities

155 15. Skin conditions (Scabies, fungal 
infection and Eczema) 
16. Otitis Media 
17. Rheumatic heart disease 
18. Reactive airway disease 
19.Dental conditions 
20. Convulsive disorders 21. Vision Impairment 
22. Hearing Impairment 
23. Neuro -motor Impairment 
24. Motor delay 
25. Cognitive delay 
26. Language delay 
27. Behavior disorder (Autism) 
28. Learning disorder 
29. Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 
30. Congenital Hypothyroidism, Sickle Cell Anemia, Beta Thalassemia (Optional) 

 
Eligibility: Children of 0-6 years of age in rural areas and urban slums in addition to children 
enrolled in classes 1st to 12th in Government and Government aided Schools. 
Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: 
http://nhm.gov.in/images/pdf/programmes/RBSK/Operational_Guidelines/Operational%20Gu 
idelines_RBSK.pdf 

 

 
11.15 Name of Scheme: Home Based Newborn Care (HBNC) 

Home Based New Born Care (HBNC) is a scheme of Ministry of Health, launched to incentivize 
Accredited social health activists (ASHA) for providing Home Based Newborn Care. 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2011 
Objectives of the scheme: 
The major objective of HBNC is to decrease neonatal mortality and morbidity through: 
• The provision of essential newborn care to all newborns and the prevention of 
complications 
• Early detection and special care of preterm and low birth weight newborns 
• Early identification of illness in the newborn and provision of appropriate care and 
referral 
• Support the family for adoption of healthy practices and build confidence and skills of the 
mother to safeguard her health and that of the newborn. 

Salient features:

156 The key activities in HBNC constitute the provision of: 
• Care for every newborn through a series of home visits by a ASHA in the first six weeks 
of life. In most state contexts this health worker is the ASHA. 
• Information and skills to the mother and family of every newborn to ensure better health 
outcomes. 
• An examination of every newborn for prematurity and low birth weight. 
• Extra home visits for preterm and low birth weight babies by the ASHA or ANM, and 
referred for appropriate care as defined in the protocols. 
• Early identification of illness in the newborn and provision of appropriate care at home or 
referral as defined in the protocols.. 
• Follow up for sick newborns after they are discharged from facilities. 
• Counselling the mother on postpartum care, recognition of postpartum complications and 
enabling referral 
• Counselling the mother for adoption of an appropriate family planning method. 

In case of those deliveries that occur on the way to the health institutions or at home out of 
choice, despite motivation for institutional delivery, the ASHA must be equipped with the skills 
and competencies required to provide appropriate newborn care. 

Support to the ASHA to ensure positive newborn health outcomes: 
For the ASHA to be effective in providing HBNC and to enable reductions in neonatal mortality, 
the following support needs to be provided: 
Payments: Training in round one of Module 6 &7 (Details in link below) equips ASHAs with 
the skills required for Home based new born care such as hand washing, measuring temperature 
of newborn, weighing of new born, post natal care, managing hypothermia etc. All ASHAs who 
have completed training of Round one of Module 6 &7 are eligible to undertake the HBNC visits 
and are entitled for the HBNC incentive. The ASHA is to be paid Rs. 250 for conducting home 
visits for the care of the newborn and post partum mother. HBNC incentive is applicable per 
newborn, thus in cases of twins or triplets the incentive amount for ASHA would be two times of 
the regular HBNC incentive of Rs. 250 (i.e, Rs.500) or three times of Rs. 250 (i.e,Rs. 750) 
respectively. 
The schedule of payment is as follows: 
• Six visits in the case of institutional delivery (Days 3, 7, 14, 21, 28 and 42), and 
• Seven visits in the case of home delivery (Day 1, 3, 7, 14, 21, 28, and 42). 
• In cases of Caesarean section delivery, where the mother returns home after 5 -6days, 
ASHAs are entitled to full incentive of Rs. 250 if she completes all five visits starting 
from Day 7 to Day 42. 
• In cases when a newborn is discharged from SNCU, ASHAs are eligible to full incentive 
amount of Rs. 250 for completing the remaining visits. In addition, ASHAs are also 
eligible for an incentive of Rs. 50 for monthly follow up of low birth weight babies and 
newborns discharged from SNCU (as approved by MSG of the National Health Mission 
on December 6th , 2013). The low birth weights are followed up for two years and SNCU 
discharged babies for one year. 
• In cases where the woman delivers at her maternal house and returns to her husband‟s 
house, two ASHAs undertake the HBNC visits i.e, one at maternal house immediately 
after delivery and another one at husband‟s house when the newborn returns home or vice

157 Salient features: NUHM would endeavour to achieve its goal through: - 
i) Need based city specific urban health care system to meet the diverse health care needs of the 
urban poor and other vulnerable sections. 
ii) Institutional mechanism and management systems to meet the health -related challenges of a 
rapidly growing urban population. versa. In such cases the HBNC incentive of Rs. 250 can be divided in to two parts in a 
way that each ASHA who completes 3 visits or more is entitled to Rs. 125. This would be 
done only after ANM/ASHA Facilitator have visited the household and verified the home 
visits. In these instances, if an ASHA undertakes less than 3 visits she would not be 
entitled for the HBNC incentive. The other ASHA completing five or more visits in this 
case would get the whole amount of Rs. 250. 

Eligibility: Accredited social health activists (ASHA) 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: http://nhm.gov.in/images/pdf/programmes/child - 
health/guidelines/Revised_Home_Based_New_Born_Care_Operational_Guidelines_2014.pdf 

 

 

11.16 Name of Scheme: National Urban Health Mission (NUHM) 

National Urban Health Mission (NUHM) a sub -mission under an overarching National Health 
Mission (NHM) was launched to address healthcare needs of urban population, particularly 
urban poor, with special focus on slum dwellers and vulnerable population like homeless, rag - 
pickers, migrant workers etc. 
Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2013 
Objectives of the scheme: 
The National Urban Health Mission would aim to improve the health status of the urban 
population in general, but particularly of the poor and other disadvantaged sections, by 
facilitating equitable access to quality health care through a revamped public health system, 
partnerships, community based mechanism with the active involvement of the urban local 
bodies.

158 

 
Funding Pattern: 

The centre -state funding pattern will be 75:25 for all the States except North -Eastern states 
including Sikkim and other special category states of Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and 
Uttarakhand, for whom the centre -state funding pattern will be 90:10. 
Eligibility: NUHM would cover cities and towns with more than 50,000 population as well as 
District Headquarters having population between 30,000 – 50,000, 
Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: 
https://nhm.gov.in/images/pdf/NUHM/Implementation_Framework_NUHM.pdf 

 

 
11.17 Name of Scheme: Revised National TB Control Programme (RNTCP) 

To eliminate TB in India by 2025, five years ahead of the global target, a framework to guide the 
activities of all stakeholders including the national and state governments, development partners, 
civil society organizations, international agencies, research institutions, private sector, and many 
others whose work is relevant to TB elimination in India is formulated by RNTCP as National 
Strategic Plan for Tuberculosis Elimination 2017 -2025. 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2017 
Objectives: 
1. To achieve and maintain a cure rate of at least 85% among newly detected infectious (new 
sputum smear positive) cases. 

2. To achieve and maintain detection of at least 70% of such cases in the population. iii) Partnership with community and local bodies for a more proactive involvement in planning, 
implementation, and monitoring of health activities. 
iv) Availability of resources for providing essential primary health care to urban poor. 
v) Partnerships with NGOs, for profit and not for profit health service providers and other 
stakeholders.

159 Salient features : 

RNTCP has released a „National strategic plan for tuberculosis 2017 -2025‟ (NSP) for the control 
and elimination of TB in India by 2025. According to the NSP TB elimination has been 
integrated into the four strategic pillars of “Detect – Treat – Prevent – Build” (DTPB). 

„National strategic plan for tuberculosis elimination 2017 -2025‟ - 

RNTCP has released a „National strategic plan for tuberculosis 2017 -2025‟ (NSP) for the control 
and elimination of TB in India by 2025. According to the NSP TB elimination have been 
integrated into the four strategic pillars of “Detect – Treat – Prevent – Build” (DTPB). 

Detect : 

The first objective of NSP is to find all drug sensitive TB cases (DS -TB) and drug resistant TB 
cases (DRTB) with an emphasis on reaching TB patients seeking care from private providers and 
undiagnosed TB cases in high -risk populations (such as prisoners, migrant workers, people living 
with HIV/AIDS, contacts etc.). 

Early diagnosis and treatment of TB cases in the community is an important step in TB 
elimination, which will help in decreasing the risk of transmission of disease to others, poor 
health outcomes, and social and economic hardships of the patient and their family. 

Notification of TB cases : Notification of all TB patients from all health care providers is made 
mandatory by Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India since 2012. All 
health care providers (clinical establishments run or managed by government (including local 
authorities), private, or NGO sectors, and /or individual practitioners) should notify every TB 
case to local health authorities (district health officer, chief medical officer of a district, and 
municipal health officer of a municipal corporation/ municipality) every month. With its 
amendment in 2015, all laboratories are also included to notify TB cases. 

Till now, only medical practitioners, hospitals and laboratories were notifying TB patients to 
government health system, now according to „Mandatory TB notification Gazette for private 
practitioners, chemists and public health staff‟ March 2018, all chemists will also inform about 
TB patients for whom they have dispensed the TB drugs. TB patients themselves are also 
encouraged to notify themselves. Every TB patient will be attempted to reach out by the local 
public health authority, namely, District Health Officer or Chief Medical Officer of a District and 
Municipal Health Officer of urban local bodies, so that the incentives and support to patients, 
families and communities can be properly extended. 

NIKSHAY : To facilitate TB notification, RNTCP has developed a case -based web -based TB 
surveillance system called “NIKSHAY” (https://nikshay.gov.in ) for both government and 
private health care facilities. Future enhancements under NIKSHAY are for patients support,

160 logistics management, direct data transfers, adherence support and to support interface agencies 
which are supporting programme to expand the reach. 

Public private partnership : For promotion of public -private mix (PPM) in TB prevention and 
care, private providers are provided incentives for TB case notification, and for ensuring 
treatment adherence and treatment completion. The incentives are provided through direct 
beneficiary transfer. 

The incentives to the Private Sector TB Care Provider are as follows : 

• Rs 250/- on notification of a TB case diagnosed as per Standards for TB Care in India (STCI) 

• Rs 250/- on completion of every month of treatment 

• Rs 500/- on completion of entire course of TB treatment 

• Rs 2750/ for notification and management of a drug-sensitive patient over 6-9 months as per 
STCI 

• Rs 6750/ -for notification and correct management of a drug-resistant case over 24 months as per 
STCI 
Free drugs and diagnostic tests to TB patients in private sector - Free drugs and diagnostic 
tests are provided to TB patients seeking treatment from private health sector. There are two 
approaches for ensuring access to free drugs and diagnostic tests to TB patients in private sector, 
first is access to programme - provided drugs and diagnostics through attractive linkages; and 
second is reimbursement of market - available drugs and diagnostics. 

Significant cost reduction of select diagnostics is achieved by „Initiative for Promoting 
Affordable and Quality TB Tests‟ (IPAQT). 131 private sector labs networked to provide four 
quality tests for TB at or below the „ceiling prices. 

For TB diagnosis more than 14,000 designated microscopy centres spread across the country. 
Cartridge Based Nucleic Acid Amplification Tests (CBNAAT) / Line Probe Assay (LPA) have 
been established at district levels for decentralised molecular testing for drug resistant TB. 
Reference laboratories have been established at state and national levels which provide culture 
and dug sensitivity test (DST) services as well as molecular diagnosis. 

Treat : 

Next step under the programme is initiation and sustaining all TB patients on appropriate anti -TB 
treatment wherever they seek care, with patient friendly system and social support. Provision of 
free TB drugs in the form of daily fixed dose combinations (FDCs) for all TB cases is advised 
with the support of directly observed treatment (DOT).

161 (DOT is a specific strategy, to improve adherence by any person observing the patient taking 
medications in real time. The treatment observer does not need to be a health -care worker, but 
could be a friend, a relative or a lay person who works as a treatment supervisor or supporter. If 
treatment is incomplete, patients may not be cured and drug resistance may develop). 

Screening of all patients for rifampicin resistance (and for additional drugs wherever indicated) 
is done. For drug sensitive TB, daily fixed dose combinations (FDCs) of first-line anti- 
tuberculosis drugs in appropriate weight bands for all forms of TB and in all ages should be 
given. First line treatment of drug -sensitive TB consists of a two -months (8weeks) intensive 
phase with four drug FDCs followed by a continuation phase of four months (16 Weeks) with 
three drug FDCs. 

For new TB cases , the treatment in intensive phase (IP) consists of eight weeks of Isoniazid 
(INH), Rifampicin, Pyrazinamide and Ethambutol (HRZE) in daily doses as per four weight 
band categories and in continuation phase three drug FDCs - Rifampicin, Isoniazid, and 
Ethambutol (HRE) are continued for 16 weeks. 

For previously treated cases of TB , the Intensive Phase is of 12 weeks, where injection 
streptomycin is given for 8 weeks along with four drugs (INH, Rifampicin, Pyrazinamide and 
Ethambutol) and after 8 weeks the four drugs (INH, Rifampicin, Pyrazinamide and Ethambutol) 
in daily doses as per weight bands are continued for another four weeks. In continuation phase 
Rifampicin, INH, and Ethambutol are continued for another 20 weeks as daily doses. 

The continuation phase in both new and previously treated cases may be extended by 12 -24 
weeks in certain forms of TB like skeletal, disseminated TB based on clinical decision of the 
treating physician. 

Patients eligible for retreatment should be referred for a rapid molecular test or drug 
susceptibility testing to determine at least rifampicin resistance, and preferably also isoniazid 
resistance status. On the basis of the drug susceptibility profile, a standard first -line treatment 
regimen (2HRZE/4HR) can be repeated if no resistance is documented; and if rifampicin 
resistance is present, shorter regimen for MDR -TB (multi drug resistant TB) regimen should be 
prescribed according to WHO‟s recent drug resistant TB treatment guidelines. 

RNTCP has introduced Bedaquiline CAP for MDR -TB under conditional access programme in 
2016 across six sites, with a country wide scale up plan in 2017 -2020. 

Nikshya poshak yozana : It is centrally sponsored scheme under National Health Mission 
(NHM), financial incentive of Rs.500/ - per month is provided for nutritional support to each 
notified TB patient for duration for which the patient is on anti -TB treatment. Incentives are 
delivered through Direct benefit transfer (DBT) scheme to bank accounts of beneficiary*. 

Expending options for ICT based treatment adherence support mechanisms:

162 • Mobile based “Pill-in-Hand” adherence monitoring tool 

• Interactive Voice Response (IVR), SMS reminders. 

• Specially designed electronic pill boxes or strips with GSM connection and pressure sensor 

• Patient Compliance toolkit: a mobile app for patients to report treatment compliance using video, 
audio or text message 

• Automated pill loading system 

• innovatively designed ICT enabled smart cards SMS gateway 

Intensifying TB control activities in following key populations is addressed in NSP: 

• TB-HIV 

• Diabetics, Tobacco use and Alcohol dependence 

• Poor, undernourished, economically and socially backward communities 

• TB control in hilly and difficult terrains 

• Substance dependence and sexual minorities 

• TB and pregnancy 

• Paediatric population 

• Prison Inmates and staff of prisons/jails 

• management of extra pulmonary TB 

Prevent : 

With the objective to prevent emergence of TB in susceptible population various measures are 
indicated as: 

• Scale up air -borne infection control measures at health care facilities 

• Treatment for latent TB infection in contacts of bacteriologically -confirmed cases 

• Address social determinants of TB through intersectoral approach.

163 a) Air borne infection control measures -TB infection control is a combination of measures 
aimed at minimizing the risk of TB transmission within population and hospital and other 
settings. The foundation of such infection control is: 

• Early diagnosis, and proper management of TB patients. 

• Health education about cough etiquettes and proper disposal of sputum by patient. Cough 
etiquette means covering nose and mouth when coughing or sneezing. This can be done with a 
tissue, or if the person doesn‟t have a tissue they can cough or sneeze into their upper sleeve or 
elbow, but they should not cough or sneeze into their hands. The tissue should then be safely 
disposed of. 

• Houses should be adequately ventilated. 

• Proper use of air borne infection control measures in health care facilities and other settings 

b) Contact tracing -Since transmission can occur from index case to the contact any time (before 
diagnosis or during treatment) all contacts of TB patients must be evaluated. These groups 
include: 

• All close contacts, especially household contacts 

• In case of paediatric TB patients, reverse contact tracing for search of any active TB case in the 
household of the child must be undertaken. 

• Particular attention will be paid to contacts with the highest susceptibility to TB infection 

c) Isoniazid Preventive Therapy (IPT) - Preventive therapy is recommended to Children < 6 
years of age, who are close contacts of a TB patient. Children will be evaluated for active TB by 
a medical officer/ pediatrician and after excluding active TB he/she will be given INH preventive 
therapy 

In addition to above, INH preventive therapy will be considered in following situation: 

• For all HIV infected children who either had a known exposure to an infectious TB case or are 
Tuberculin skin test (TST) positive (>=5mm induration) but have no active TB disease. 

• All TST positive children who are receiving immunosuppressive therapy (e.g. Children with 
nephrotic syndrome, acute leukemia, etc.). 

• A child born to mother who was diagnosed to have TB in pregnancy will receive prophylaxis for 
6 months, provided congenital TB has been ruled out. BCG vaccination can be given at birth 
even if INH preventive therapy is planned.

164 Close contacts of index cases with proven DR -TB (drug resistant -TB) will be monitored closely 
for signs and symptoms of active TB as isoniazid may not be prophylactic in these cases. 

d) BCG vaccination - It is provided at birth or as early as possible till one year of age. BCG 
vaccine has a protective effect against meningitis and disseminated TB in children. 

e) Addressing social determinants of TB like poverty, malnutrition, urbanization, indoor air 
pollution, etc. require inter departmental/ ministerial coordinated activities and the programme is 
proactively facilitating this coordination. 

Build : 

Health system strengthening for TB control under the National Strategic Plan 2017 -2025 is 
recommended in the form of building and strengthening enabling policies, empowering 
institutions and human resources with enhanced capacities. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: https://www.nhp.gov.in/revised -national -tuberculosis -control - 
programme_pg

165 Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
12.1 Name of Scheme: Lumpsum Provision scheme for the benefit of NER 
Including Sikkim 
The Scheme of 10% Lump Sum Provision for the benefit of North Eastern Region including 
Sikkim became operational in the Ministry of Urban Development from the financial year 2001 - 
02. It is now under implementation as per guidelines of Non -Lapsable Central Pool of Resources 
(NLCPR). The assistance released from the Pool is tied with the project and no diversion is 
permissible. 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 

Year of Commencement: 2001 -02 

Objectives: The broad objective of the scheme is to ensure speedy development of infrastructure 
in the North Eastern Region including Sikkim by increasing the flow of budgetary financing for 
new infrastructure projects / schemes in the Region. Both physical and social infrastructure 
sectors will be considered for providing support under the Central Pool, with projects relating to 
basic services like Water and Sanitation receiving priority. 

Salient features : 

Admissible Components: 

Grants -in-aid under the scheme shall be released for the following thrust areas: - (i) Water supply 
– Urban Water Supply Programme / Augmentation of water supply (ii) Development / 
Improvement of Sewerage System / Sanitation projects / Septage Management / City Sanitation 
Plan (iii) Solid Waste Management Project / decentralized treatment of liquid waste (iv) 
Construction of Bridges / Flyovers / Footpaths (v) Construction of market complex / parking 
complexes / truck terminus (vi) Construction of retaining wall (vii) Civic amenities like 
playground, community hall, night shelters, old age and destitute children home, burial and 
cremation ground (viii) Improvement of existing / construction of new roads, pavements (ix) 
Drainage system such as Storm water drainage 5. Inadmissible Components: (i) Salary and 
Wages (ii) Purchase of Vehicles (iii) Furniture and fixtures (iv) Regular maintenance works. 

The allocation of funds for the States for the year would be worked out keeping in view equitable 
distribution of resources for the states and also considering various parameters such as 
completion of projects, present performance in utilizing funds, number of urban settlements, 
urban population, coverage of new urban centers etc. inter-State and intra-State difference, 
Human Development Indices, BPL population, infrastructure density area and terrain would also 
be kept in mind.

166 Funding Pattern : 

(i) Funds will be released to the State Government / Executing agency whose projects have been 
routed through and recommended by respective State Government. 
(ii) For projects to be executed by the State Government through their agencies, the cost shall be 
shared by the Central and State Government in ratio of 90:10. However, in case of projects to be 
executed by Central Government agency, the sanctioning committee may provide enhanced level 
funding. The State will bear / waive Turn Over Tax / Work Contact Tax, or any such State level 
taxes where the projects are executed by Central Agency. 

Eligibility : All urban areas falling under North Eastern Region and Sikkim excepting cities 
covered under Urban Infrastructure and Governance component of Jawaharlal Nehru National 
Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) shall be eligible for assistance under the scheme subject to 
availability of funds. 

Area of Operation: North Eastern Region including Sikkim. 

For detail Information visit: 
http://mohua.gov.in/upload/uploadfiles/files/guideline_10_FINAL_NER.pdf 

 

12.2 Name of Scheme: Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana -National Urban Livelihoods Mission 
Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2013 
Objectives: 
To reduce poverty and vulnerability of the urban poor households by enabling them to access 
gainful self employment and skilled wage employment opportunities, resulting in an appreciable 
improvement in their livelihoods on a sustainable basis, through building strong grassroots level. 
The mission would also aim to providing the shelter equipped with essential services to the urban 
homeless in a phased manner. The scheme also address the livelihood concern of the urban street 
vendors by facilitating with suitable space, institutional credit, and social security and skills to 
the urban street vendor for accessing emerging market opportunities. 
Salient features : 

DAY -NULM will adopt the following strategy: i Building capacity of the urban poor, their 
institutions and the machinery involved in the implementation of livelihoods development and 
poverty alleviation programmes through handholding support; ii Enhancing and expanding

167 existing livelihoods options of the urban poor; iii Building skills to enable access to growing 
market -based job opportunities offered by emerging urban economies; iv Training for and 
support to the establishment of micro -enterprises by the urban poor – self and group; v Ensure 
availability and access for the urban homeless population to permanent 24-hour shelters 
including the basic infrastructural facilities like water supply, sanitation, safety and security; vi 
Cater to the needs of especially vulnerable segments of the urban homeless like the dependent 
children, aged, disabled, mentally ill, and recovering patients etc., by creating special sections 
within homeless shelters and provisioning special service linkages for them; vii To establish 
strong rights -based linkages with other programmes which cover the right of the urban homeless 
to food, healthcare, education, etc. and ensure access for homeless populations to various 
entitlements, including to social security pensions, PDS, ICDS, feeding programmes, drinking 
water, sanitation, identity, financial inclusion, school admission etc., and to affordable housing; 
viii To address livelihood concerns of the urban street vendors by facilitating access to suitable 
spaces, institutional credit, social security and skills to the urban street vendors for accessing 
emerging market opportunities. 

Funding Pattern : 
Sl. No States/UTs Central Share 
(percent) State / UT Share 
(percent) 
 North Eastern States -Arunachal Pradesh, 
Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, 
Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura 90 10 
 Three Himalayan States - Jammu and 
Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, and 
Uttarakhand 90 10 
 Other States (States excluding Sr. No. 1 & 
2) 60 40 
 UTs with legislature - Delhi and 
Puducherry 100 Nil 
 UTs without legislature -A&N Islands, 
Daman & Diu, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and 
Chandigarh 100 Nil 

 
Eligibility : Mission will be implemented in all District Headquarter Towns and all other cities 
with a population of 1,00,000 or more as per 2011 census. The States/ UTs are also allowed to 
implement all or any of the components of the Mission in any other Statutory Town, based on the 
local capacity and requirement. The primary target of DAY -NULM is the urban poor, including 
the urban homeless. The finalisation of Socio -economic and Caste Census (SECC), 2011 for 
identification of urban poor is currently under progress. Accordingly, as an interim measure, the 
target of DAY -NULM will be the urban population identified presently as below poverty line

168 population in urban areas by the States/UTs. The coverage may be broadened to include families 
of disadvantaged groups like SCs, STs, women, minorities, disabled etc. subject to a maximum 
of 25 percent of the above urban poor population. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: 
https://nulm.gov.in/PDF/NULM_Mission/NULM_mission_document.pdf 

 

12.3 Name of Scheme: Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana 

“Housing for All” Mission for urban area will be implemented during 2015 -2022 and this 
Mission will provide central assistance to implementing agencies through States and UTs for 
providing houses to all eligible families/beneficiaries by 2022. Mission will be implemented as 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) except for the component of credit linked subsidy which will 
be implemented as a Central Sector Scheme. 

Year of Commencement: Mission with all its component has become effective from the date 
17.06.2015 and will be implemented upto 31.03.2022. 

Objectives: The objective of the Mission is to provide Central assistance to implementing 
agencies through States/Union Territories (UTs) for providing houses to all eligible 
families/beneficiaries by 2022. 

Salient features : 

All 4041 statutory towns as per Census 2011 with focus on 500 Class I cities would be covered 
in three phases as follows: • Phase I (April 2015 - March 2017) to cover 100 Cities selected from 
States/UTs as per their willingness. • Phase II (April 2017 - March 2019) to cover additional 200 
Cities • Phase III (April 2019 - March 2022) to cover all other remaining Cities Ministry, 
however, will have flexibility regarding inclusion of additional cities in earlier phases in case 
there is a resource backed demand from States/UTs. 2.2 The mission will support construction of 
houses upto 30 square meter carpet area with basic civic infrastructure. States/UTs will have 
flexibility in terms of determining the size of house and other facilities at the state level in 
consultation with the Ministry but without any enhanced financial assistance from Centre. Slum 
redevelopment projects and Affordable Housing projects in partnership should have basic civic 
infrastructure like water, sanitation, sewerage, road, electricity etc. ULB should ensure that 
individual houses under credit linked interest subsidy and beneficiary led construction should 
have provision for these basic civic services. 2.3 The minimum size of houses constructed under 
the mission under each component should conform to the standards provided in National

169 Building Code (NBC). If available area of land, however, does not permit building of such 
minimum size of houses as per NBC and if beneficiary consent is available for reduced size of 
house, a suitable decision on area may be taken by State/UTs with the approval of SLSMC. All 
houses built or expanded under the Mission should essentially have toilet facility. 2.4 The houses 
under the mission should be designed and constructed to meet the require - The houses under the 
mission should be designed and constructed to meet the requirements of structural safety against 
earthquake, flood, cyclone, landslides etc. conforming to the National Building Code and other 
relevant Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) codes. 2.5 The houses constructed/acquired with 
central assistance under the mission should be in the name of the female head of the household 
or in the joint name of the male head of the household and his wife, and only in cases when there 
is no adult female member in the family, the house can be in the name of male member of the 
household. 2.6 State/UT Government and Implementing Agencies should encourage formation 
of associations of beneficiaries under the scheme like RWA etc. to take care of maintenance of 
houses being built under the mission. 

As per the scheme guidelines of PMAY (U), the States/UTs are required to prepare Detailed 
Project Reports (DPRs) covering the eligible beneficiaries as per demand survey in the particular 
urban cities/towns and get these approved by the State Level Sanctioning and Monitoring 
Committee (SLSMC) before these projects are considered by Central Government for 
considering the admissible central assistance involved in consonance with the scheme guidelines. 
Thus, selection of projects under PMAY (U) and their implementation are with the State/UT 
Governments. 

Funding Pattern : Under PMAY, the cost of unit assistance is to be shared between Central and 
State Governments in the ratio 60:40 in plain areas and 90:10 for North Eastern and hilly states. 

Eligibility : A beneficiary family will comprise husband, wife, unmarried sons and/or unmarried 
daughters. The beneficiary family should not own a pucca house either in his/her name or in the 
name of any member of his/her family in any part of India to be eligible to receive central 
assistance under the mission. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: https://pmaymis.gov.in/assets/pdf/document/hfa_Guidelines.pdf

170 Ministry of Human Resource Development 

13.1 Name of Scheme: Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan (RUSA) 

Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan (RUSA) is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS), 
launched in 2013 aims at providing strategic funding to eligible state higher educational 
institutions. RUSA places greater emphasis on the improvement of the quality of teaching - 
learning processes in order to produce employable and competitive graduates, post -graduates and 
PhDs. Spread across two plan periods (XII and XIII), the programme focuses on state higher 
educational institutions and draws upon the best practices from colleges and universities across 
the nation. 
Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 

Objectives of the scheme: The objectives of RUSA are to: 

• Improve the overall quality of state institutions by ensuring conformity to prescribed norms 
and standards and adopt accreditation as a mandatory quality assurance framework. 
• Usher transformative reforms in the state higher education system by creating a facilitating 
institutional structure for planning and monitoring at the state level, promoting autonomy in 
State Universities and improving governance in institutions. 
• Ensure reforms in the affiliation, academic and examination systems. 
• Ensure adequate availability of quality faculty in all higher educational institutions and ensure 
capacity building at all levels of employment. 
• Create an enabling atmosphere in the higher educational institutions to devote themselves to 
research and innovations. 
• Expand the institutional base by creating additional capacity in existing institutions and 
establishing new institutions, in order to achieve enrolment targets. 
• Correct regional imbalances in access to higher education by setting up institutions in 
unserved & underserved areas. 
• Improve equity in higher education by providing adequate opportunities of higher education to 
SC/STs and socially and educationally backward classes; promote inclusion of women, 
minorities, and differently abled persons.

171 Structure of Scheme: 

RUSA would create new universities through upgradation of existing autonomous colleges and 
conversion of colleges in a cluster. It would create new model degree colleges, new professional 
colleges and provide infrastructural support to universities and colleges. Faculty recruitment 
support, faculty improvements programmes and leadership development of educational 
administrators are also an important part of the scheme. In order to enhance skill development 
the existing central scheme of Polytechnics has been subsumed within RUSA. A separate 
component to synergise vocational education with higher education has also been included in 
RUSA. Besides these, RUSA also supports reforming, restructuring and building capacity of 
institutions in participating state. 
The following are the primary components of RUSA that capture the key action and funding 
areas that must be pursued for the fulfilment of the targets: 

• Up gradation of existing autonomous colleges to Universities 
• Conversion of colleges to Cluster Universities 
• Infrastructure grants to Universities 
• New Model Colleges (General) 
• Upgradation of existing degree colleges to model colleges 
• New Colleges (Professional) 
• Infrastructure grants to colleges 
• Research, innovation and quality improvement 
• Equity initiatives 
• Faculty Recruitment Support 
• Faculty improvements 
• Vocationalisation of Higher Education 
• Leadership Development of Educational Administrators 
• Institutional restructuring & reforms 
• Capacity building & preparation, data collection & planning 

Funding Pattern:

172 The central funding (in the ratio of 60:40 for general category States, 90:10 for special category 
states and 100% for union territories) would be norm based and outcome dependent. The funding 
would flow from the central ministry through the state governments/union territories to the State 
Higher Education Councils before reaching the identified institutions. The funding to states 
would be made on the basis of critical appraisal of State Higher Education Plans, which would 
describe each state‟s strategy to address issues of equity, access and excellence in higher 
education. 
Eligibility: Higher educational institutions (Colleges & Universities). 

Area of Operation : 

All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: http://rusa.nic.in/ 

 
13.2 Name of Scheme: Samagra Shiksha 

The Union Budget, 2018 -19, has proposed to treat school education holistically without 
segmentation from pre-nursery to Class 12. Samagra Shiksha - an overarching programme for 
the school education sector extending from pre -school to class 12 has been, therefore, prepared 
with the broader goal of improving school effectiveness measured in terms of equal opportunities 
for schooling and equitable learning outcomes. It subsumes the three erstwhile Schemes of Sarva 
Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA), Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan (RMSA) and Teacher 
Education (TE). 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2018 
Objectives: 
The major objectives of the Scheme are provision of quality education and enhancing learning 
outcomes of students; Bridging Social and Gender Gaps in School Education; Ensuring equity 
and inclusion at all levels of school education; Ensuring minimum standards in schooling 
provisions; Promoting Vocationalisation of education; Support States in implementation of Right 
of Children to Free and Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 2009; and Strengthening and up - 
gradation of SCERTs/State Institutes of Education and DIET as a nodal agencies for teacher 
training. 

Salient features :

173 The Scheme will be implemented as a Centrally Sponsored Scheme by the Department through a 
single State Implementation Society (SIS) at the State/UT level. At the National level, there 
would be a Governing Council headed by Minister of Human Resource Development and a 
Project Approval Board (PAB) headed by Secretary, Department of School Education and 
Literacy. The Governing Council will be empowered to modify financial and programmatic 
norms and approve the detailed guidelines for implementation within the overall Framework of 
the scheme. Such modifications will include innovations and interventions to improve the quality 
of school education. The Department will be assisted by a Technical Support Group (TSG) at 
Educational Consultants of India Limited (EdCIL) to provide technical support in functional 
areas pertaining to access, equity and quality education by merging the TSGs of the Schemes of 
SSA, RMSA and TE. States would be expected to bring a single Plan for the entire school 
education sector. 

The major interventions, across all levels of school education, proposed under the scheme are: (i) 
Universal Access including Infrastructure Development and Retention; (ii) Gender and Equity; 
(iii) Inclusive Education; (iv) Quality; (v) Financial support for Teacher Salary; (vi) Digital 
Initiatives; (vii) RTE Entitlements including uniforms, textbooks etc.;(viii) Pre-school 
Education; (ix) Vocational Education; (x) Sports and Physical Education; (xi) Strengthening of 
Teacher Education and Training; (xii) Monitoring; (xiii) Programme Management; and (xiii) 
National Component. It is proposed that preference in the interventions would be given to 
Educationally Backward Blocks (EBBs), LWEs affected districts, Special Focus Districts 
(SFDs), Border areas and the 117 Aspirational districts. 

The main emphasis of the Scheme is on improving quality of school education by focusing on 
the two T‟s – Teacher and Technology. The strategy for all interventions under the Scheme 
would be to enhance the Learning Outcomes at all levels of schooling. The scheme proposes to 
give flexibility to the States and UTs to plan and prioritize their interventions within the scheme 
norms and the overall resource envelope available to them. Funds are proposed to be allocated 
based on an objective criteria based on enrolment of students, committed liabilities, learning 
outcomes and various performance indicators. 

The Scheme will help improve the transition rates across the various levels of school education 
and aid in promoting universal access to children to complete school education. The integration 
of Teacher Education would facilitate effective convergence and linkages between different 
support structures in school education through interventions such as a unified training calendar, 
innovations in pedagogy, mentoring and monitoring, etc. This single scheme will enable the 
SCERT to become the nodal agency for conduct and monitoring of all in-service training 
programmes to make it need -focused and dynamic. It would also enable reaping the benefits of 
technology and widening the access of good quality education across all States and UTs and 
across all sections of the Society.

174 Funding Pattern : The fund sharing pattern for the scheme between Centre and States is at 
present in the ratio of 90:10 for the 8 North -Eastern States viz. Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, 
Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura and 3 Himalayan States viz. 
Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand and 60:40 for all other States and Union 
Territories with Legislature. It is 100% centrally sponsored for Union Territories without 
Legislature. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

 

For detail Information visit: http://samagra.mhrd.gov.in/about.html

175 Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 

14.1 Name of Scheme: International Cooperation (IC) 
Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 1996 

Objectives of the scheme: 

Technology infusion and/or upgradation of Indian micro, small and medium enterprises 
(MSMEs), their modernization and promotion of their exports are the principal 
objectives of assistance under the International Cooperation Scheme. 
Salient features: 

The Scheme would cover the following activities: (i) Deputation of MSME business delegations 
to other countries for exploring new areas of technology infusion/upgradation, facilitating joint 
ventures, improving market of MSMEs products, foreign collaborations, etc. (ii) Participation by 
Indian MSMEs in international exhibitions, trade fairs and buyer -seller meets in foreign 
countries as well as in India, in which there is international participation. (iii) Holding 
international conferences and seminars on topics and themes of interest to the MSME. 
Funding Pattern 
Scale of Assistance and Eligible Items of Expenditure: 

Items of expenditure for which assistance may be considered under the scheme are 
specified below: 
Visit of MSME Business Delegations to foreign countries: 

Assistance would be provided under the scheme to the eligible applicant 
organisations for visit of MSME delegations to foreign countries, with the 
objectives of exploring new areas of technology infusion/upgradation, facilitating 
joint ventures, improving market of MSMEs products, foreign collaborations, 
etc. The eligible items for visit of MSME delegations and the scale of assistance 
would be as under: 

SI. 
No. Eligible Items of 
expenditure Scale of Assistance 
(a) Air Fare For Micro, Small and Medium entrepreneurs: 
100% of the economy class airfare subject to a maximum 
of Rs.1.50 lakhs or actual fare paid, whichever is lower 
(for one representative from each participating enterprise).

176 For office bearer(s) of the applicant organisation: 
100% of the economy class airfare subject to a maximum of 
Rs.1.50 lakhs or actual fare paid, whichever is lower. 
(b) Duty allowance Office Bearer to get US Dollar 150 per day towards duty 
allowance. It may be noted that no other items of expenditure 
towards hotel accommodation, fooding, local transport etc. 
are reimbursable separately to Office Bearer. 
(c) Air fare, hotel 
accommodation, local 
transport and daily 
allowance for Government 
Official In case any Government official participates in the 
delegation, his/her expenses (air fare, hotel accommodation, 
local transport and daily allowance) as per his/her entitlement 
will be in addition to the above sanctioned amount on actual 
basis. This amount may be reimbursed to the applicant 
organization. 
A delegation u n d er the scheme would normally comprise of a minimum of 05 entrepreneurs and 
01 Office Bearer. 
Government Official is entitled for air fare, DA and hotel accommodation and local transport as 
per his/her entitlement prescribed by the Government. The applicant organization shall bear the 
expenditure and claim the same in their reimbursement claim bills. 

Visit & Participation of MSME delegation in International Exhibitions/Trade 
Fairs/Buyer - Seller Meets held in foreign countries: 
Assistance would be provided under the scheme to the eligible applicant organisations 
for visit & participation in International Exhibitions/ Trade Fairs/ Buyer -Seller 
Meets held in foreign countries in order to showcase Indian technologies, 
expose Indian MSMEs to the latest foreign technologies, access international 
buyers and sellers and forge business alliances etc. 
The eligible items for such participation of MSMEs and the scale of assistance would 
be as under: 

SL 
No. Eligible Items 
of expenditure Scale of Assistance 
(a) Space Rent (Stall 
Charges) For Micro, Small and Medium entrepreneurs: 

100% of the space rent subject to· a maximum of Rs.1. 00 lakh or 
actual rent paid, whichever is lower (for one representative from 
each participating enterprise). 
Note: Office Bearer is not eligible for Space 
Rent.

177 (b) Air Fare For Micro, Small and Medium entrepreneurs: 

100% of the economy class airfare subject to a maximum of Rs.1.50 
lakhs or actual fare paid, whichever is lower (for one 
representative from each participating enterprise). 
For office bearer(s) of the applicant organisation: 
100% of the economy class airfare subject to a maximum of 
Rs.1.50 lakhs or actual fare paid, whichever is lower. 
(c) Duty allowance Office Bearer to get US Dollar 150 per day towards duty 
allowance. It may be noted that no other items of expenditure 
towards hotel accommodation, fooding, local transport, etc. are 
reimbursable separately to Office Bearer. 
(d) Air fare, hotel 
accommodation, 
local transport and 
daily allowance for 
Government Official. In case any Government official participates in the 
delegation: his/her expenses (air fare, hotel accommodation, local 
transport and daily allowance) as per his/her entitlement will be in 
addition to the above sanctioned amount on actual basis. This 
amount may be reimbursed to the applicant organization. 
Note: 

A delegation for participation m an event under the scheme would normally 
comprise of a minimum of 05 Entrepreneurs and 01Office Bearer. 
Government Official is entitled for air fare, DA and hotel accommodation and local 
transport as per his/her entitlement prescribed by the Government. The 
applicant organization shall bear the expenditure and claim the same in their reimbursement 
claim bills. 

 
Participation in International exhibitions/ trade fairs held in India: 

Assistance may be provided under the scheme for participation of Indian MSMEs 
in events like India International Trade Fair (IITF) organised by 
India Trade Promotion Organisation (ITPO) or such other reputed 
international exhibitions/ trade fairs held in India as may be approved by the 
Ministry under the scheme. Items of expenditure for which assistance may be 
considered are specified below: 

Sl.No Eligible Items of expenditure Scale of Assistance 
 Space Rent (Stall Charges) For Micro, Small and Medium entrepreneurs: 
100% of the space rent subject to a maximum of 
Rs. 1.00 lakh or actual rent paid, whichever is lower 
(for one representative from each enterprise).

178 

Organisation of International Conferences/ Seminars in India: 

Assistance may be provided under the scheme for organisation of 
International Conferences/ Seminars in India wherein the foreign 
participants/foreign speakers are 50% or more of the total participants/speakers. 
Items of expenditure for which assistance may be considered are specified below: - 

Sl.No Eligible Items of expenditure Scale of Assistance 
 Air fare for Foreign Resource 
Persons. The amount of assistance for Airfare by economy 
class is subject to a maximum of Rs.1.50 lakh for 
foreign resource persons. The number of foreign 
resource persons to be supported per event would 
be three or 50% of the total resource persons of the 
event, whichever is lower. 
Note: The maximum assistance would be limited to Rs. 4.50 lakh per event per 
applicant organisation. 

Holding/organising International conferences/seminars/ workshops in India by 
Ministry of MSME or organizations under it: 
Ministry of MSME or organizations under it organize international 
conference/ events/meets/trade fairs in India with participation by foreign 
coun tries/delegations/MSMEs. Expenditure m a y be incurred for organizing such 
conferences/parties/meets/trade fairs in India from IC Scheme. Expenditure could be 
incurred for the air fares for delegates, local hospitality including accommodation and 
transport, payment of per diem allowance, venue of the event, food, holding of an 
exhibition along with conference/meet/holding of buyer seller meeting etc. Approval 
of Minister for MSME should be taken for organizing these events as well as incurring of 
expenditure under this head. For each event, Ministry of MSME would seek approval for 
the Budget from Minister for MSME after consulting IFW. 
Quantum of Assistance: 

The quantum of financial assistance to the applicant organizations will be 
decided on the basis of the budget estimate (paragraph 5.1 above) & the eligible 
items of expenditure (as mentioned above), subject to the following limits: 

(i) International Events held in foreign 
countries: Rs. 25.00 lakh per event Note: The maximum assistance would be limited to Rs.5.00 lakh per event per 
applicant organisation.

179 (ii) International Events held in India: Rs. 5.00 lakh per event for participation in 
International exhibitions/trade fairs and Rs.4.50 
lakh for organization of International 
Conferences/Seminars. 
(iii) Holding/organising International 
conferences/seminars/ workshops in 
India by Ministry of MSME or 
organizations under it. For each event, Administrative Wing of the 
Ministry of MSME would seek the approval for 
the budget from Minister of MSME after 
consulting IFW. 

 
Grants under the Scheme will be released on re -imbursement basis, after the 
event is over, on submission of the re - imbursement claim in the proforma prescribed by 
the Ministry. Claim must be accompanied with the documents, as prescribed by the 
Ministry. 
Eligibility: Besides the Ministry of MSME, events under the Scheme can be organised by: (a) 
State/Central Government Organisations; (b) Industry/Enterprise Associations; and (c) 
Registered Societies/Trusts and Organisations associated with the MSME. 
The eligibility conditions for financial assistance under the Scheme are: (a) The organisation 
should be suitably registered (i.e., companies under the Companies Act, societies under the 
Societies Act, etc.) with the primary objective of promotion and development of MSME. (b) The 
organisation must be engaged in such activities for at least last 3 years and have a good track 
record. (c) The organisation should have regular audited accounts for the past 3 years. (d) Events, 
for which financial support under the Scheme is sought, must have significant international 
participation. 
Area of Operation 
All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: https://msme.gov.in/sites/default/files/IC -Scheme -Guidelines - 
June -2018.pdf 

 
14.2 Name of Scheme: Prime Minister‟s Employment Generation Programme (PMEGP) 

Government of India has approved the introduction of a new credit linked subsidy programme 
called Prime Minister‟s Employment Generation Programme (PMEGP) by merging the two 
schemes that were in operation till 31.03.2008 namely Prime Minister‟s Rojgar Yojana (PMRY) 
and Rural Employment Generation Programme (REGP) for generation of employment 
opportunities through establishment of micro enterprises in rural as well as urban areas. 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme

180 Year of Commencement: 2008 -09 

Objectives of the scheme: 

(i) To generate employment opportunities in rural as well as urban areas of the country through 
setting up of new self -employment ventures/projects/micro enterprises. (ii) To bring together 
widely dispersed traditional artisans/ rural and urban unemployed youth and give them self - 
employment opportunities to the extent possible, at their place. (iii) To provide continuous and 
sustainable employment to a large segment of traditional and prospective artisans and rural and 
urban unemployed youth in the country, so as to help arrest migration of rural youth to urban 
areas. (iv) To increase the wage earning capacity of artisans and contribute to increase in the 
growth rate of rural and urban employment. 

Salient features: 

PMEGP will be a central sector scheme to be administered by the Ministry of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises (MoMSME). The Scheme will be implemented by Khadi and Village 
Industries Commission (KVIC), a statutory organization under the administrative control of the 
Ministry of MSME as the single nodal agency at the National level. At the State level, the 
Scheme will be implemented through State KVIC Directorates, State Khadi and Village 
Industries Boards (KVIBs) and District Industries Centres (DICs) and banks. The Government 
subsidy under the scheme will be routed by KVIC through the identified Banks for eventual 
distribution to the beneficiaries/entrepreneurs in their Bank accounts. The Implementing 
Agencies, namely KVIC, KVIBs and DICs will associate reputed Non -Government Organization 
(NGOs)/reputed autonomous institutions/Self Help Groups (SHGs)/ National Small Industries 
Corporation (NSIC)/Udyami Mitras empanelled under Rajiv Gandhi Udyami Mitra Yojana 
(RGUMY), Panchayati Raj institutions and other relevant bodies in the implementation of the 
Scheme, especially in the area of identification of beneficiaries, of area specific viable projects, 
and providing training in entrepreneurship development. 

Funding Pattern: 

• The maximum cost of the project/unit admissible under manufacturing sector is Rs.25 lakh and 
under business/service sector is Rs.10 lakh. 

• Per capita investment should not exceed ₹ 1.00 lakh in plain areas and ₹ 1.50 lakhs in Hilly 
areas. 

• Own contribution 5% to 10% of project cost. 

• General category beneficiaries can avail of margin money subsidy of 25 % of the project cost in 
rural areas and 15% in urban areas. For beneficiaries belonging to special categories such as

181 scheduled caste/scheduled tribe /women the margin money subsidy is 35% in rural areas and 
25% in urban areas. 

• Quantum of Margin Money Subsidy is given as follows: 
Categories of beneficiaries 
under PMEGP Beneficiary‟s 
contribution (of 
project cost) Rate of Subsidy (of 
project cost) 
Area (location of project/unit) Urban Rural 
General Category 10% 15% 25% 
Special (including SC / ST / 
OBC /Minorities/Women, Ex- 
servicemen, Physically 
handicapped, NER, Hill and 
Border areas etc. 05% 25% 35% 
Note: (1) The maximum cost of the project/unit admissible under manufacturing sector is Rs. 25 
lakh. 

(2) The maximum cost of the project/unit admissible under business/service sector is Rs. 10 lakh. 

(3) The balance amount of the total project cost will be provided by Banks as term loan 

Eligibility: 

(i) Any individual, above 18 years of age 

(ii) There will be no income ceiling for assistance for setting up projects under PMEGP. 

(iii) For setting up of project costing above Rs.10 lakh in the manufacturing sector and above Rs. 
5 lakh in the business /service sector, the beneficiaries should possess at least VIII standard pass 
educational qualification. 

(iv) Assistance under the Scheme is available only for new projects sanctioned specifically under 
the PMEGP. 

(v) Self Help Groups (including those belonging to BPL provided that they have not availed 
benefits under any other Scheme) are also eligible for assistance under PMEGP. 

(vi) Institutions registered under Societies Registration Act,1860; 

(vii) Production Co -operative Societies, and 

(viii) Charitable Trusts. (ix) Existing Units (under PMRY, REGP or any other scheme of 
Government of India or State Government) and the units that have already availed Government 
Subsidy under any other scheme of Government of India or State Government are not eligible.

182 Area of Operation : 

• Rural Area as declared under KVIC Act 2006 - Scheme to be implemented by KVIC, KVIB 
and DIC (“Rural Area” means the area comprised in any Village and includes the area comprised 
in any town, the population of which does not exceed twenty thousand or such other figure as the 
Central Government may specify from time to time as declared under KVIC Act 2006) 

• Urban area - Only District Industries Centers (DIC) 

For detail Information visit: https://msme.gov.in/sites/default/files/PMEGP -guidlines -final.pdf 

 

 
14.3 Name of Scheme: Marketing Assistance Scheme 

Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises, inter -alia, through National Small Industries 
Corporation (NSIC), a Public Sector Enterprise of the Ministry, has been providing marketing 
support to Micro & Small Enterprises (MSEs) under Marketing Assistance Scheme. 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 

Objectives: 

The broad objectives of the scheme, inter -alia, include: 3.1. To enhance marketing capabilities & 
competitiveness of the MSMEs. 3.2. To showcase the competencies of MSMEs. 3.3. To update 
MSMEs about the prevalent market scenario and its impact on their activities. 3.4. To facilitate 
the formation of consortia of MSMEs for marketing of their products and services. 3.5. To 
provide platform to MSMEs for interaction with large institutional buyers. 3.6. To disseminate/ 
propagate various programmes of the Government. 3.7. To enrich the marketing skills of the 
micro, small & medium entrepreneurs. 

Salient features : 

The marketing assistance scheme provides assistance for the following activities: 
a) Organisation of exhibitions abroad and participation in international exhibitions/ trade fairs 
b) Co-sponsoring of exhibitions organised by other organisations/industry associations/ agencies; 
c) Organising buyer -seller meets, intensive campaigns and marketing promotion activities. 

Nature of assistance: 

(a).The maximum net budgetary support for participating in an international exhibition/trade fair 
would normally be restricted to an overall ceiling of Rs. 30 lakh per event (Rs. 40 lakh for Latin 
American countries).

183 (b). The budget for organizing the Domestic Exhibitions/Trade Fair would depend upon the 
various components of the expenditure, i.e. space rental including construction and fabricating 
charges, theme pavilion, advertisement, printing material, transportation etc. However, the 
budgetary support towards net expenditure for organizing such exhibition/trade fair would 
normally be restricted to a maximum amount of Rs. 45 lakh. The corresponding budgetary limit 
for participation in an exhibition/trade fair shall be Rs. 15 lakh. 

(c). Financial assistance will be provided ranging from 25% to 95% of the Air -Fare and space 
rent to entrepreneurs on the basis of size and type of the enterprise. Financial assistance for co - 
sponsoring an event would be limited to 40% of the net expenditure, subject to a maximum 
amount of 5 lakh. 

Eligibility : MSMEs, Industry Associations and other organisations related to MSME sector. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: https://msme.gov.in/sites/default/files/MASCHEME -New- 
18112014.pdf 

 

14.4 Name of Scheme: Entrepreneurship and Skill Development Programme 

Ministry of MSME has been organizing a number of Entrepreneurship and skill development 
programmes for the existing & potential entrepreneurs, in order to build their capacity to take up 
successful ventures. ESDP is an important component under the vertical of “Development of 
MSMEs”, which has been up -scaled in consonance with the changing landscape of the MSME 
Ecosystem and its present challenges in India. 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 

Objectives: 

The objective of the programme is to motivate youth representing different sections of the 
society including SC/ST/Women, differently abled, Ex -servicemen and BPL persons to consider 
self employment or entrepreneurship as one of the career options. The ultimate objective is to 
promote new enterprises, capacity building of existing MSMEs and inculcating entrepreneurial 
culture in the country. 

Salient features : 

Activities under the ESDP Scheme 1. The programme includes the following modules: 1. 
Industrial Motivational Campaign (IMC) 2. Entrepreneurship Awareness Programme (EAP) 3.

184 Entrepreneurship -cum-Skill Development Programme (E-SDP) 4. Management Development 
Programme (MDP). 

Above mentioned activities/programmes will be conducted through Implementing Agencies 
(IAs) i.e. Office of DC MSME & its field offices, all field organizations of M/o MSME, 
Ministries/Departments/organizations/Corporations/PSUs/Agencies under the administrative 
control of Central/State Governments, as approved by the Empowered Committee headed by AS 
& DC(MSME) from time to time. Respective IAs (other that MSME -DIs) will be responsible for 
submitting utilization certificates for grants/funds issued to them within the financial year. 

Overall 40% of the targeted beneficiaries of EAPs and E -SDPs should be Women. If needed, 
special programmes for women beneficiaries can be organized. The qualification of the 
participants and structure of the fees will be decided by the Implementing Agencies. The age of 
the participants will be 18 years and above. 

A provision has been made to allocate upto 5% towards Admin Expenses and training aids. 

Eligibility : Preference would be given to the candidates from SC, ST, Women, Ex -Service 
Persons of Defence Forces, Differently Abled and BPL category persons. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: https://msme.gov.in/sites/default/files/Up -Scaled -ESDP - 
Guidelines.pdf 

 
14.5 Name of Scheme: Coir Vikas Yojana (CVY) 

The Scheme “Coir Vikas Yojana” earlier it was known as Coir Plan (General) Scheme which 
provides development of domestic and export markets, skill development and training, 
empowerment of women, employment/entrepreneurship creation and development, enhanced 
raw material utilization, trade related services, welfare activities for the coir workers, etc. The 
scheme has the following components during the 12th Plan: - 
1. Skill Upgradation and Mahila Coir Yojana (MCY) 

2. Export Market Promotion (EMP) 

3. Development of Production Infrastructure (DPI) 

4. Domestic Market Promotion (DMP)

185 5. Trade and Industry Related Functional Support Services (TIRFSS) 

6. Welfare Measure (Group Personal Accident Insurance Scheme) 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 

Year of Commencement: 2015 

Structure of Scheme: The scheme has the following components during the 12th Plan: - 

1. Skill Upgradation and Mahila Coir Yojana (MCY) 

The Scheme, “Skill Upgradation & Mahila Coir Yojana” consists of two distinct 
components. Viz. (a) Skill Upgradation, (b) Mahila Coir Yojana. 

The Objectives of the scheme are to:- 
• Train personnel in the cadres of Supervisors/ Instructors/ Artisans and to meet the 
requirement of skilled man power for the development of coir industry. 
• Help in transfer of technology to non -traditional areas through development of skill of 
coir workers. 
• Provide coir yarn spinning ratts, coir processing equipments, machinery items, etc. with 
a subsidy of 75% under Mahila Coir Yojana. 
• Provide self employment to rural woman artisans in regions producing coir fibre and 
enabling them to get better returns through improvement of productivity and quality. 
Providing them with a better work environment and elimination of drudgery involved in 
the traditional methods of spinning and product manufacturing. 
• Encourage new entrepreneurs both in traditional and non-traditional areas under 
Entrepreneurship Development Programmes to venture into coir industry and trade and 
thereby accelerate the development of the industry in the existing and new areas. 
• Aim at inculcating quality consciousness among the workers at grass root level and to 
educate them on proper methods of producing standard quality fibre, yarn and products. 
• Create awareness among the coconut growers, entrepreneurs etc. to set up coir based 
units and to modernize the existing units for better productivity, quality and also enhance 
earnings. 
• contribute to generate employment in rural areas of the coconut producing States. 

Nature of Assistance: 

The stipend per trainee for the skill development programmes will be limited to Rs.1000/ - per 
month and in the case of training programmes of less than one month duration, stipend will be 
disbursed on prorata basis. The honorarium for the trainer will be limited to Rs. 6,000/ - per 
month. An amount of Rs.400/ - per head per month will be provided as financial assistance to the

186 training sponsoring agency to meet the operational cost of the training for raw material, power 
charges, other incidentals etc. 

Under MCY, the Coir Board provides 75% cost of motorised Ratt/motorised traditional Ratt as 
one time subsidy, subject to a ceiling of Rs.7,500 in the case of motorised Ratt and Rs.3,200 for 
motorised traditional and Electronic Ratt. 

Selection of trainees for in -house training at NCT&DC will be made by inviting applications 
through advertisements in print and electronic media and through recommendation from the 
authorities of the coir producing States. 

Selection of trainees for training programmes conducted at Regional Extension Centers will be 
made by the officer -in-charge of the centre through sponsoring of candidates by trade 
associations, unit owners, Industries Department, NGOs, Co-operatives, etc. 

Eligibility: Rural women artisans in regions producing coir fibre. 

2. Export Market Promotion (EMP) 

Coir Board is implementing the Central Sector Scheme of Export Market Promotion with a 
view to improve the export performance of Indian Coir Sector through various export market 
promotion activities such as sponsoring delegations, participation in seminars and 
conferences, organising participation in international fairs, undertaking generic publicity 
abroad, extending financial assistance to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises and 
Exporters, presenting Coir Industry Awards on an annual basis to recognize the outstanding 
performance in the areas of export, domestic trade, R&D, functioning of units & societies 
etc. 

Nature of Assistance: 

1. Delegation, Consultancy & Information Sourcing 

2. Participation in seminars and conferences 

3. Participation in international fairs/buyer seller meets 

4. Publicity abroad 

5. External Market Development Assistance 

6. Coir Industry Awards

187 Eligibility : Manufacturers, Entrepreneurs and Exporters of Coir. 

3. Development of Production Infrastructure (DPI) 

Coir Board is implementing the plan scheme „Development of Production Infrastructure‟ with 
the objective of providing modern infrastructure facilities to coir production units, resulting in 
improvement of productivity and quality and also in creation of employment opportunities 
especially for women in the rural areas. It also aims the establishment of new “State of the Art” 
Coir Processing Units, Spread of the industry to potential areas, Enhanced utilization of available 
raw material, Attracting new generation entrepreneurs to the industry, Modernisation of existing 
unit, Production of high value customer oriented products, Make the Coir Industry competitive, 
Adoption of eco friendly production techniques and Achieve the target of a pollution free coir 
industry with technological advancements. 

Nature of Assistance: 

Under the DPI scheme the Coir Board financial assistance is provided for setting up of coir units 
with a project cost up to Rs. 10 lakhs in the country. Subsidy will be provided @ 25% of the 
project cost subject to a maximum of Rs. 6 lakh for setting up of De -fibering Unit, Rs.4 lakh for 
Automatic Spinning Unit and Rs.5 lakh for others, including Coir Pith Unit. For a Composite or 
a Multiple Unit, the maximum monetary ceiling of assistance would be Rs. 9 lakh. For 
calculation of subsidy amount, the cost of building will be restricted to a maximum of Rs. 8 lakh 
for De-fibering and coir pith units and Rs. 6 lakhs for others including Automatic spinning Unit. 

Eligibility : 

All new coir processing units registered with Coir Board under Coir Industry (Registration) 
Rules, 2008 and registered with the DIC of the respective region of the entire coir sector of the 
country with project cost exceeding Rs.10/ - lakh each or more than the ceiling fixed in Coir 
Udyami Yojana Scheme are eligible for assistance under the scheme. 

4. Domestic Market Promotion (DMP) 

Domestic Market Promotion is one of the major functions envisaged under the Coir Industry Act 
1953; Under the Scheme the Board is undertaking various measures for popularizing coir and 
coir products and expanding the domestic market. The following activities are undertaken by the 
Board for the purpose. I. Establishment and Maintenance of Showrooms & Sales Depots. II. 
Participation in Domestic Exhibitions. 

Nature of Assistance: 

The Scheme proposes to provide financial assistance to the Apex Co -operative Societies, Central 
Co-op. Societies, Primary Co-operative Societies, Public Sector Enterprises in the coir industry

188 and the Showroom and Sales Depots of the Coir Board. The MDA is granted at the rate of 10% 
of their average annual sales turnover of coir products including coir yarn and rubberized coir 
goods during the preceding three financial years. This Assistance will be shared on 1:1 basis 
between the Central Government and the concerned State/Union Territory Government. The 
disbursement of Central share of MDA will be subject to the budgetary outlay available with the 
Coir Board under the relevant schemes. 

Eligibility : Apex societies, Central Co -operative societies, primary Co -operatives, Public Sector 
Enterprises, Showrooms & Sales Depots of the Board. 

5. Trade and Industry Related Functional Support Services (TIRFSS) 

Collection of statistical data pertaining to various aspects like production, productivity, labor 
infrastructure, raw material, marketing, etc is required for providing feedback to the trade and 
Trade and Industry Related Functional Support Services (TIRFSS) industry and for formulating 
appropriate policy for the overall organized and systematic development of Coir Board. 
Introducing e - governs system in order to assess the schemes and services of coir Board by the 
public easily and to make all the activities in transparent way. Organize HRD programs for Coir 
workers for uploading their knowledge in all spheres. 

Nature of Assistance: 

Accessible export data such as name of export countries, quantum of export in country basis. 
Survey & Study reports of various sectors is available for the Coir Industry. HRD Program can 
be utlised by coir workers for the betterment of their knowledge in tunes of modern technology. 

Eligibility : Coir workers, New Entrepreneurs. 

6. Welfare Measure (Group Personal Accident Insurance Scheme) 

The Coir Board is implementing the plan scheme „Welfare Measures -Coir Workers Group 
Personal Accident Insurance‟ scheme for providing financial compensation to deceased/disabled 
coir worker/nominee. The entire insurance premium is paid by the Coir Board to the insurance 
company selected by calling quotations. The financial compensation is provided by the insurance 
company to the disabled coir workers or nominee of the disabled or deceased coir workers. 

Nature of Assistance: 

Compensations payable under the scheme are given below. 

1. Accident death: Rs.50,000 

2. Permanent total disability: Rs.50,000

189 3. Permanent partial disability: Rs.25,000 

4. Provision for finger cut: Depending upon the finger and limited to applicable percentages of 
capital sum insured. 

Eligibility : 

Coir workers aged 18 years and above engaged in the industry (no upper age limit) are covered 
under the insurance scheme. The disabled coir worker or nominee of the disabled/deceased coir 
worker can apply for the claim. Considering the welfare of the women who form the majority of 
the group proposed, the accident in their case will include death and disablement arising out of 
and traceable to sterilisation and consequent complications, arising out of pregnancy, child birth, 
caesarean hysterectomy, removal of breast as well as murder and rape, etc. 

For detail Information visit: http://msme.gov.in/sites/default/files/Coir -Vikas - 
YojanaContents.pdf

190 Schemes of the Khadi and Village Industries Commission 

 
14.6.1 Name of Scheme: 'Pottery making activity' under "Village Industry Development 
Scheme (GVY)" scheme 
Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 

Objectives: 

• Increase technical knowledge of pottery making artisans and reduce production costs 

• To increase the income of pottery making artisans by providing skill development 
training and modern and automated equipment. 

• To provide skill development training to self-help groups of artisans making pottery on 
products like garden pots, axes, decorative products 

• Encouraging successful pottery making artisans to set up their units under PMEGP 
scheme 

• Developing necessary market linkages by tie-ups with exports and large buyer houses 

• Innovation of various new products and raw materials for the manufacture of 
international level pottery in the country. 

Type of assistance 

• Training program on clay making for traditional pottery artisans 

• Press pottery training program for pottery makers as well as non pottery making artisans 

• Jigger -Jolly training program for pottery makers as well as non -pottery making artisans 

• Training program of trainers for skilled traditional pottery making artisans wishing to 
work as master trainers. 
• Support by providing pottery making wheel, clay blunger and granulator etc. 

Eligibility : 

• Artisans aged 18 and up to 55 years.

191 • Person trained in related activity, formerly engaged in the same activity, will be given 
preference based on their education and profile and minimum 50% for SC / ST / Female 
candidates / BPL category 

• Non-pottery -making artisans wishing to start new industries may be selected for the 
training of press pottery -making and jigger -jolly etc. 

How to apply 

• Advertisements to be given by the State / Divisional Directors of KVIC through local 
print / electronic media for inviting applications with project proposals from prospective 
beneficiaries / self -help groups wishing to undertake experimental projects / training / 
setting up machines etc. By answering 

• Contact the concerned State Office, KVIC for details. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: https:// www.champions.gov.in/Ministry -of- 
MSME_Portal/youth_Entrepreneurs -rural_urban_self_employment/New_Schemes.htm 

 

 
14.6.2 Name of Scheme: 'Beekeeping activity' under "Village Industry Development 
Scheme (GVY)" scheme 
Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 

Objectives: 

• Adopt scientific practices of bee management; 

• Using available natural resources in beekeeping; 

• Create sustainable employment for bee keepers / farmers; 

• Providing supplementary income to bee keepers / farmers; 

• Create awareness about honey and other beehive products; 

• To create awareness about the benefits of beekeeping in cross polination.

192 Type of assistance 

• 5 days beekeeping training is provided to the beneficiaries through various training 
centers / State Beekeeping Extension Centers / Master Trainers as per the prescribed 
syllabus. 

• Assistance with bee boxes, tool kits etc. 

Eligibility : 

• Persons in the age group of 18 to 55 years with Aadhaar card or voter ID card etc. with 
photograph. 

• A person from a family will be eligible for 10 beekeeping boxes and tool kits (bee well, 
smoker, knife and hive tool) along with bee colonies. 

• A person already trained in beekeeping by KVIC / KVIB / NABARD / KVK / Agri - 
Horticulture Board / Eligible Bee NGOs etc. will be eligible for assistance with 
beekeeping boxes and tool kits with beekeeping colonies. 

• Persons who have taken advantage of other government schemes for the same / similar 
purpose will not be eligible; The beneficiary will have to give a declaration to this effect. 

How to apply 

• Advertisements to be given by the State / Divisional Directors of KVIC through local 
print / electronic media for inviting applications with project proposals from prospective 
beneficiaries / self -help groups wishing to undertake experimental projects / training / 
setting up machines etc. By answering 

• Contact the concerned State Office, KVIC for details. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

 

For detail Information visit: https:// www.champions.gov.in/Ministry -of- 
MSME_Portal/youth_Entrepreneurs -rural_urban_self_employment/New_Schemes.htm

193 14.6.3 Name of Scheme: "Agarbati making project" "Village Industry Development 
Scheme (GVY)" scheme 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 

Objectives: 

• Reviving the agarbatti industry in the country; 

• Increasing indigenous production of incense sticks to reduce imports; 

• To provide training to the artisans working in the agarbati sector and to assist them with 
agarbatti manufacturing machines, raw materials for making incense sticks, etc.; 

• Create permanent employment for traditional artisans and increase their wages; And 

• Develop backward and forward linkages and provide guidance to artisans and self-help 
groups etc. 

Type of assistance 

• 10 days free incense skill upgrading training by experienced persons / experts in agarbati 
industry (20 candidates per batch) 

• Assistance from agarbati manufacturing machines, raw materials for agarbati 
manufacturing etc. 

Eligibility : 

• Artisans in the age group of 18 to 55 years with Aadhaar card / voter ID card and ration 
card etc. with photographs. 

• One person from one family for pedal driven machine and two persons from one family 
for group activity (SHG) for automatic agitation machine. 

• For self-help groups or groups, all members will be trained. 

• KVIC / KVIB / NABARD / KVK / Persons trained in making incense by the training 
centers or banks / eligible NGOs recognized by the State or Central Government. 

• Preference will be given to artisans working with KVI institutions for the production of 
incense sticks. 

• Persons enjoying other government schemes for the same / similar purpose will not be 
eligible; The beneficiary will have to give a declaration to this effect.

194 How to apply 

• Advertisements to be given by the State / Divisional Directors of KVIC through local 
print / electronic media for inviting applications with project proposals from prospective 
beneficiaries / self -help groups wishing to undertake experimental projects / training / 
setting up machines etc. By answering 

• Contact the concerned State Office, KVIC for details. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

 

For detail Information visit: https:// www.champions.gov.in/Ministry -of- 
MSME_Portal/youth_Entrepreneurs -rural_urban_self_employment/New_Schemes.htm

195 Ministry of Minority Affairs 
15.1 Name of Scheme: The Maulana Azad Education Foundation (MAEF) 

The Maulana Azad Education Foundation (MAEF) was established in 1989 as a voluntary, non - 
political, non-profit making society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860. 

Type of scheme: Educational schemes (Plan Assistance). 

Year of Commencement: 1989 

Objectives of the scheme: 

The main objectives of MAEF are to provide basic educational infrastructure and facilities in the 
area of concentration of educationally backward minorities which do not have adequate 
provision for elementary, secondary schools and Sr. Secondary Schools / Jr. Colleges / 
Professional &; Vocational Training Institutes. 

Salient features: 

The Society/Trust seeking assistance under the Scheme shall apply for the purposes specified on 
the prescribed proforma. 

Backward areas, particularly areas that are educationally backward should receive appropriate 
attention/priority. 

Assistance to an individual unit should not exceed Rs. 30.00 lakhs and proposal for only one 
purpose will be accepted at a time. 

The grantee should undertake to name the entire beneficiary institution or a part of it after 
Maulana Abul Kalam Azad. 

Society/Trust: The Scheme may be revised as and when required and no claim will be 
entertained from any organization/Institution for consideration as a permanent beneficiary. 
The applications may be sent to the Foundation by post or may be submitted personally in the 
Foundation office on all working days between 10.00 A.M. to 5.00 P.M. from May 1st to 30th 
September every year. The incomplete proposals will not be accepted, and the same will be 
returned back pointing out deficiency. Revised complete applications resubmitted will be treated 
as fresh applications. 

Only one proposal will be entertained at a time.

196 Each document/enclosure attached to the application, must be certified/attested by Society/Trust 
official or Notary Public. 

On receipt of proposal, it will be scrutinized in the office of the Foundation, and the 
shortcomings will be communicated to the Organization/Institutions by registered post. 

The complete proposals shall be referred for inspection, which shall be carried out through State 
Government officials, members of the Foundation or by any other person to whom the 
Foundation may entrust this job. 

The inspection reports shall be placed before the Sub-Committee/ Governing Body of the 
Foundation for consideration and the decision shall be communicated to the 
Organization/Institution. 

Ceiling Limits for Sanction or Grant -In-Aid under Various Categories: 
Sl.No Category Ceiling limits (Rs.) 
1. Each If the School is recognized up to 5th standard, running in 
rented building & own building required. 10,00,000/ - 
2. If the School is recognized up to 5th standard & to be upgrade 
up to 8th standard. 6,00,000/ - 
3. If the School is recognized up to 8th, running in rented building 
& own building required. 15,00,000/ - 
4. If the school is recognized up to 8th standard & to be upgrade 
up to 10th standard. 8,00,000/ - 
5. If the School is recognized up to 10th running in rented 
building & own building is required. 20,00,000/ - 
6. If the School is recognized up to 10th standard and to be 
upgraded up to 12th standard. 10,00,000/ - 
7. If the School is running up to 12th standard, running in rented 
& own building is required. 25,00,000/ - 
8. If the school is running up to 12th standard and expansion of 
building is required. 15,00,000/ - 
9. Purchase of lab equipments in School recognized up to 10th 
Class (Physics/Chemistry/Biology/Computers) 3,00,000/ - 
10. Purchase of lab equipments in School recognized up to 12th 
Class (Physics/Chemistry/Biology/Computers) 5,00,000/ - 
11. Purchase of Furniture/Computers for School recognized up to 
5th Class/8th Class. 2,00,000/ - 
12. For construction of Hostel Building. 
a) 100 Bedded dormitory type hostel building 
b) 50 Bedded dormitory type hostel building 
c) 30 Bedded dormitory type hostel building 
30,00,000/ - 
15,00,000/ - 
10,00,000/ - 
13. a) For Construction/Expansion of D.Ed. College Building 
b) For Construction/Expansion of B.Ed. College Building 10,00,000/ - 
15,00,000/ - 
14. a) For Construction/expansion of Vocational Training Centre 15,00,000/ -

197 (VTC) Building 
b) For Purchase of Equipments/tools/machines for VTC 
5,00,000/ - 
15. a) For Construction/Expansion of Technical Institute/ITI/ITC 
bldg. 
b) For Purchase of Equipments/Machines/Tools for Technical 10,00,000/ - 

8,00,000/ - 

 
Note: a) 100 Bedded Hostel may be provided only if the Institution is already having hostel 
facility with at least 50 Bedded accommodations. Initially 30 Bedded hostel may be provided on 
experimental basis. 

b) For Girl‟s school from class 8th onwards bathroom must be the part of the building. 

c) The existing rate of Construction as per CPWD is Rs. 800/- per Sq. Ft. but the same varies in 
different states according to the situation of the area. 

Funding Pattern: 

The Schemes of the Foundation are mainly of two types, viz; Grants -in-aid to NGOs for 
construction and expansion of schools / hostels, technical / vocational training centres with 
emphasis on girl students and Scholarships to meritorious girl students. The various schemes run 
by the Foundation are as under: 
• Financial assistance to establish/expand schools/residential schools/colleges; 
• Financial assistance for purchase of laboratory equipment and furniture etc; 
• Financial assistance for setting up/strengthening vocational/technical training 
centre/institutes; 
• Financial assistance for construction of hostel buildings; 
• Maulana Azad National Scholarships for meritorious girl students; 
• Maulana Abdul Kalam Azad Literacy Awards. 

 
Eligibility: 

• Society/Trust should be registered under the Societies Registration Act/ Indian Trust Act for the 
last three years. 

• Society/Trust (NGO) should be registered on NGO -D ARPAN of NITI Aayog Portal. 

• Society/Trust (NGO) must be having properly constituted Managing Committee with its powers 
clearly defined in its bye-laws.

198 • Society/Trust must be having proper audit reports with Balance Sheet, Receipt - Payment and 
Income -Expenditure statements reflecting educational activities carried out for the last three 
years. 

• Society/Trust should be in a position to receive involvement of knowledge -able persons for 
furtherance of their programmes on voluntary basis. 

• Society/Trust (NGO) should not be run for the profit of any individual or a body of individuals/ 
family and it should not be controlled by any individual or a body of individuals/ family. The 
members from one family should not be more than 50% in the Managing Committee. The NGO 
will have to attach an affidavit on Rs .100/ - stamp paper that the members belonging to one 
family are less than 50%. 

• The institutions for whose construction/expansion the assistance is required should be in 
existence and recognized/affiliated to the concerned State/Central Board/ Council/ University. 

• Society/Trust should promote communal harmony and social unity. 

• More than 25% of the beneficiary students in the Institution for whose expansion/ strengthen 
assistance is sought should be belonging to educationally backward minorities/ target group. 

• For seeking assistance for construction of hostel building , it is necessary that the Institution for 
which the hostel is required should be recognized at least up to 12th standard and 10 standard for 
North Eastern States and Jammu &;; Kashmir. 

• Society/Trust (NGO) must be having at least 500 sq. yard land (in urban/semi -urban areas) or at 
least half acre land (in rural areas) in its name or on lease for not less than 30 years for the 
proposed project or as per criteria laid down by recognizing / affiliating body of respective State 
/ Central Board / Council/ University. 

• Society/Trust (NGO) should be ready to invest at least 15% of the total cost of project as NGO's 
share on the project 

• Society/Trust (NGO) will not take loan on the building constructed/being constructed with 
MAEF assistance/on the land on which the building has been constructed with the assistance of 
the Foundation. However, if it becomes necessary, then prior permission of the Foundation for 
the same will be necessary. 

• Society/Trust (NGO) will have to inform about the funds received under FCRA, if any, or funds 
likely to be received under FCRA. 

• Institutions recognized by Madarsa Boards or running as Study/ Examination Centers of 
NCPUL, NIOS, MANNU, etc. are not entitled for getting grants from MAEF.

199 Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: 
http://www.minorityaffairs.gov.in/en/schemesperformance/corpus -funds -maef 

 

 
15.2 Name of Scheme: Seekho aur Kamao (Learn & Earn) 

The scheme will aim at upgrading the skills of the minority youths in various modern/traditional 
vocations depending upon their educational qualification, present economic trends and the 
market potential, which can earn them a suitable employment or make them suitably skilled to go 
for self employment. 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2013 -14 
Objectives: 
To bring down unemployment rate of minorities during 12th Plan period. To conserve and 
update traditional skills of minorities and establish their linkages with market. To improve 
employability of existing workers, school dropouts etc. and ensure their placement. To generate 
means of better livelihood for marginalized minorities and bring them in the mainstream. To 
enable minorities to avail opportunities in the growing market. To develop potential human 
resource for the country. 
Salient features : 

The scheme will be implemented for the benefit of the 5 (five) notified minority communities 
under National Commission for Minorities Act 1992 (viz. Muslims, Christians, Sikhs, Buddhists 
and Parsis). However, in the States/UTs where some other minority communities notified by 
respective State/UT Governments exist, they may also be considered for the programme but they 
will not occupy more than 5% of the total seats. 

The scheme is implemented through selected Project Implementing Agencies (PIAs) all over the 
country. 

a) Societies of the State Governments/UT Administrations registered under Societies 
Registration Act.

200 b) Any private recognized/registered professional institution of repute conducting such skill 
development courses for at least last three years with established market linkages and 
placement record. 
c) Any industry or an association of industries like ASSOCHAM, CII, FICCI, etc. 
d) Any institution of Central/State Governments including Public Sector Undertakings and 
Training institutes of Central/ State Governments including Panchayati Raj Training 
institutions. 
e) Civil Societies (CS)/Non -Governmental Organizations (NGOs) 

Funding Pattern : (a) This is a 100% Central Sector Scheme and will be implemented by the 
Ministry directly through empanelled eligible organizations. (b) Full cost of the approved 
projects as per prescribed financial norms would be borne by the Ministry. (c) An incentive 
amount of 5% of the project cost will be payable to PIA‟s who successfully complete the project 
in time with all conditions met including placements. (d) The cost norms as detailed in the 
scheme guidelines. 

Eligibility : 

a. The trainee should belong to minority community. b. The trainee should be between 14 -35 
years of age. c. The minimum qualification of trainee should be at least Class V. d. In case 
reserved categories as prescribed under this scheme remain vacant, these vacant seats may be 
treated as unreserved. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

 

For detail Information visit: 
http://www.minorityaffairs.gov.in/sites/default/files/SEEKHO%20aur%20Kamao -eng.pdf

201 Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 

 
16.1 Name of Scheme: Grid Connected Rooftop and Small Solar Power Plants Programme 

The Government, on 19th February 2019 approved Phase -II of „Grid Connected Rooftop and 
Small Solar Power Plants Programme‟ for achieving cumulative capacity of 40 GW RTS plants 
by 2022. In Phase -II, it has been decided to implement the programme by making the DISCOMs 
and its local offices as the nodal points for implementation of the RTS programme. DISCOMs 
will play a key role in expansion of RTS as DISCOMs are having a direct contact with end user 
and they provide approval for installation, manage the distribution network and also have billing 
interface with rooftop owner. 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2015 
Objectives of the scheme: 
The key objectives of the programme are: a. To promote grid connected RTS in all consumer 
segments, viz., residential, institutional, social, Govt., commercial, industrial etc. b. To bring 
DISCOMs at forefront as key drivers for rapid deployment of RTS. c. To create awareness, 
capacity building, human resource development, etc. d. To promote sustainable business models. 
e. To create additional RTS capacity of 38000 MW in the country by 31.12.2022 out of which a 
capacity of 4000 MW in residential sector with Central Financial Assistance and 34000 MW in 
other sectors (i.e., Social, Government, educational, PSUs, Statutory /Autonomous bodies, 
Private Commercial, Industrial Sectors etc.) by suitably incentivizing DISCOMs f. To promote 
domestic manufacturing of solar cells and module 

Salient features: 

The programme will be implemented through DISCOMs. This will lead to ease of access for the 
consumers. The programme provides for Central Financial Assistance (CFA) for the household 
owner and Group Housing Societies to set up RTS on the rooftop of their residence/residential 
campus. DISCOMs should create customer friendly environment by making enabling provisions 
in their regulations and smooth approval process required for RTS. Since the requisite expertise 
on solar energy for implementation of this Programme may not be available with DISCOMs, 
they will be at liberty to use the services of State Nodal Agencies (SNAs) engaged in the 
promotion of Renewable Energy of the respective States/UTs. 

The major components of this phase II of the programme are: -

202 Component A: Setting up of 4000 MW of grid connected rooftop solar projects in residential 
sector with Central Financial Assistance (CFA). 

Component B: Incentives to Electricity Distribution Companies (DISCOMs) based on 
achievement towards initial 18000 MW of grid connected rooftop solar plants. 

Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: 
http://164.100.77.194/img/documents/uploads/7ccd3b4b3bb94a51af516e2ee4fdede3.pdf

203 Ministry of Rural Development 

 
17.1 Name of Scheme: National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP) 

The National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP) is a welfare programme being administered 
by the Ministry of Rural Development. This programme is being implemented in rural areas as 
well as urban areas . NSAP represents a significant step towards the fulfilment of the Directive 
Principles of State Policy enshrined in the Constitution of India which enjoin upon the State to 
undertake within its means a number of welfare measures. 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 1995 
Objectives of the scheme: 
National Social Assistance Programme is a social security and welfare programme to provide 
support to aged persons, widows, disabled persons and bereaved families on death of primary 
bread winner, belonging to below poverty line households. 

Structure of Scheme: 

The programme was first launched on 15th August 1995 as a Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
comprising the National Old Age Pension Scheme (NOAPS), National Family Benefit Scheme 
(NFBS) and National Maternity Benefit Scheme (NMBS). 

Presently NSAP now comprises of the following five schemes: - 

• Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension Scheme (IGNOAPS): All persons of 60 years 
(and above) and belonging to below the poverty line category according to the criteria 
prescribed by the Government of India time to time, are eligible to be a beneficiary of the 
scheme. The pension amount at present is 400 per person per month per person for age 
group 60 to 79 years and Rs. 500 per person from age group 80 and above. The states are 
supposed to contribute an equal amount vis-a-vis the scheme 

• Indira Gandhi National Widow Pension Scheme (IGNWPS): BPL widows aged 40-59 
years are entitled to a monthly pension of Rs. 300/-. 
• Indira Gandhi National Disability Pension Scheme (IGNDPS): BPL persons aged 18 -59 
years with severe and multiple disabilities are entitled to a monthly pension of Rs. 300/-.

204 • National Family Benefit Scheme (NFBS): Under the scheme a BPL household is entitled to 
lump sum amount of money on the death of primary breadwinner aged between 18 and 64 
years. The amount of assistance is Rs. 20.000/ -. 

• Annapurna: Under the scheme, 10 kg of food grains per month are provided free of cost to 
those senior citizens who, though eligible, have remained uncovered under NOAPS . 

Eligibility: All individuals living below the poverty line, elderly, widows and persons with 
disabilities. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: http://nsap.nic.in/ 

 

17.2 Name of Scheme: Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) 

The Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) is a nationwide plan in India to provide good 
all-weather road connectivity to unconnected villages. It was launched on 25th December, 2000. 
Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2000 
Objectives of the scheme: 
The PMGSY -111 envisages consolidation of the existing Rural Road Network by upgradation of 
existing Through Routes and Major Rural Links that connect habitations to: 
• Gramin Agricultural Markets (GrAMs) 
• Higher Secondary Schools 
• Hospitals 

Structure of Scheme: 

PMGSY -111 will include such linkages. 
The government is keen to facilitate easy and faster movement to and from the food processing 
centers, Mandi (Agricultural markets) and other farmer related enterprises. This is expected to 
transport both agricultural inputs as well as outputs. This not only helps the farm production, but 
also yields many direct and indirect benefits such as minimizing the spoilage of perishable goods 
like fresh fruits and vegetables and ensures adequate remunerative prices for them. Such a 
facility ultimately leads to increased agrarian economy and helps the development of the region, 
creating multiple opportunities in wage and self employment. 
Affordable and easy access to high schools and higher secondary schools is the need of the hour 
in the present technological improvements in all sectors. Education leads to multiple

205 opportunities. Improved access to education centers helps in better school attendance and higher 
level of education. 
Providing affordable and easily accessible health facilities is prime focus of the government for 
which road connectivity plays an important role. All weather roads have shown a very positive 
correlation to improve in health indicators. 
The program will focus on upgradation of existing Through Routes and Major Rural Links based 
on priority giving importance to critical facilities like the rural markets and education & health 
facilities. However, new construction may be allowed only as a part of upgradation project to 
connect Gramin Agricultural Markets(GrAMs)/warehouses, Government hospitals and 
Educational Institutions, in case they are not connected already with a metalled road or require 
strengthening and widening of existing roads. 

Funding Pattern: 
The fund sharing pattern of construction cost under the Central and State Government will be the 
same as currently applicable to PMGSY - I & PMGSY -11. This is as under: - 
All States except 8 North• East States and 3 Himalayan States (Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal 
Pradesh & Uttarakhand) 60% Centre and 40% State. 8 NE States including Sikkim Hill states of 
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir and Uttarakhand 90% Centre ND 10% State. Union 
Territories (UTs) 100% Central Share. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories. 

For detail Information visit: http://www.pmgsy.nic.in/ 

 

 
17.3 Name of Scheme: Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
(MGNREGA) 

The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 (MGNREGA) was 
notified on September 7, 2005. The mandate of the Act is to provide at least 100 days of 
guaranteed wage employment in a financial year to every rural household whose adult members 
volunteer to do unskilled manual work. 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2006 
Objectives of the scheme: 
The MGNREGA was initiated with the objective of "enhancing livelihood security in rural areas 
by providing at least 100 days of guaranteed wage employment in a financial year, to every

206 household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work". Another aim of 
MGNREGA is to create durable assets (such as roads, canals, ponds, wells). Employment is to 
be provided within 5 km of an applicant's residence, and minimum wages are to be paid. If work 
is not provided within 15 days of applying, applicants are entitled to an unemployment 
allowance. Thus, employment under MGNREGA is a legal entitlement. 

Salient features: 

1. Adult members of a rural household, willing to do unskilled manual work, may apply for 
registration in writing or orally to the local Gram Panchayat. 

2. The Gram Panchayat after due verification will issue a Job Card. The Job Card will bear the 
photograph of all adult members of the household willing to work under MGNREGA and is free 
of cost. 

3. The Job Card should be issued within 15 days of application. 

4. A Job Card holder may submit a written application for employment to the Gram Panchayat, 
stating the time and duration for which work is sought. The minimum days of employment have 
to be at least fourteen. 

5. The Gram Panchayat will issue a dated receipt of the written application for employment, against 
which the guarantee of providing employment within 15 days. 

6. Employment will be given within 15 days of application for work, if it is not then daily 
unemployment allowance as per the Act, has to be paid liability of payment of unemployment 
allowance is of the States. 

7. Work should ordinarily be provided within 5 km radius of the village. In case work is provided 
beyond 5 km, extra wages of 10% are payable to meet additional transportation and living 
expenses. 

8. Wages are to be paid according to the Minimum Wages Act 1948 for agricultural labourers in the 
State, unless the Centre notifies a wage rate which will not be less than Rs. 60/ per day. Equal 
wages will be provided to both men and women. 

9. Wages are to be paid according to piece rate or daily rate. Disbursement of wages has to be done 
on weekly basis and not beyond a fortnight in any case. 

10. At least one -third beneficiaries shall be women who have registered and requested work under 
the scheme. 

11. Work site facilities such as crèche, drinking water, shade have to be provided.

207 12. The shelf of projects for a village will be recommended by the gram sabha and approved by the 
Zilla panchayat. 

13. At least 50% of works will be allotted to Gram Panchayats for execution. 

14. Permissible works predominantly include water and soil conservation, afforestation and land 
development works. 

15. A 60:40 wage and material ratio has to be maintained. No contractors and machinery is allowed. 

16. The Central Government bears the 100 percent wage cost of unskilled manual labour and 75 
percent of the material cost including the wages of skilled and semi -skilled workers. 

17. Social Audit has to be done by the Gram Sabha. 

18. Grievance redressal mechanisms have to be put in place for ensuring a responsive 
implementation process. 

19. All accounts and records relating to the Scheme should be available for public scrutiny. 

Funding Pattern: 

Releases of Central Share of funds are based on the projection of labour demand in the agreed -to 
(between Central Government and State Government) Labour Budget (LB). The central releases 
are, thus, based on District/State specific anticipated labour demand proposals rather than on 
predetermined budget allocations. 

The LB estimate under MGNREGA is based on the amount of total cost (viz. cost towards wage, 
material and administrative costs) to be incurred while generating a person -day wage 
employment. The 60:40 ratio for wage and material costs should be maintained at GP level for 
all works to be taken up by GP and for works to be taken by all other agencies it should be 
maintained at the Block/ Intermediate Panchayat level. Thus, expenditure per person -day 
generation of wage employment shall have wage and material costs in the proportion of 60:40. 
For example, if the cost of the project is Rs. 100, the wage expenditure is at least Rs. 60 and the 
material expenditure is at most Rs. 40. Further, a maximum of Rs. 6 can be utilized towards 
Administrative expenses over and above the wage and material expenses. 

Eligibility: Adult members of every household in rural areas. 

Area of Operation: MGNREGA covers the entire country with the exception of districts that 
have a hundred percent urban population. 

For detail Information visit: http://nrega.nic.in/netnrega/guidelines.aspx

208 17.4 Name of Scheme: Deendayal Antayodaya Yojana - National Rural Livelihoods 
Mission (NRLM) 
Aajeevika - National Rural Livelihoods Mission (NRLM) was launched by the Ministry of Rural 
Development (MoRD), Government of India in June 2011. It was renamed as DAY -NRLM in 
2015. 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2011 
Objectives of the scheme: 
To reduce poverty by enabling the poor households to access gainful self-employment and 
skilled wage employment opportunities, resulting in appreciable improvement in their 
livelihoods on a sustainable basis, through building strong grassroots institutions of the poor. 

Salient features 

• Mobilizing poor households into functionally effective SHGs and their federations 

• Enhancing access to bank credit and financial, technical and marketing services 

• Building capacities and skills for gainful and sustainable livelihoods development 

• Converging various schemes for efficient delivery of social and economic support services to 
poor households 

Structure of Scheme: 

NRLM implementation is in a Mission Mode. This enables: 

(a) shift from the present allocation based strategy to a demand driven strategy, enabling the 
states to formulate their own livelihoods -based poverty reduction action plans, 

(b) focus on targets, outcomes and time bound delivery, 

(c) continuous capacity building, imparting requisite skills and creating linkages with livelihoods 
opportunities for the poor, including those emerging in the organized sector, and (d) monitoring 
against targets of poverty outcomes. 

Funding Pattern:

209 DAY -NRLM is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme and the financing of the programme would be 
shared between the Centre and the States in the ratio of 60:40 (90:10 in case of North Eastern 
States including Sikkim; completely from the Centre in case of UTs). 

Eligibility: All rural poor families (BPL families), youth, SHGs, particularly on vulnerable 
communities such as manual scavengers, victims of human trafficking, Particularly Vulnerable 
Tribal Groups (PVTGs), Persons with Disabilities (PwDs) and bonded labour. 

Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: http://aajeevika.gov.in/ 

 

 
17.5 Name of Scheme: Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU -GKY) 

Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU -GKY) is the skilling and placement 
initiative of the Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD), Government of India. DDU -GKY has 
its origins in the Aajeevika Skills programme and the „Special Projects‟ component of the 
Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY). The scheme focuses on catering to the 
occupational aspirations of rural youth and enhancing their skills for wage employment. 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2014 -15 
Objectives of the scheme: 
DDU -GKY is a part of the National Rural Livelihood Mission (NRLM), tasked with the dual 
objectives of adding diversity to the incomes of rural poor families and cater to the career 
aspirations of rural youth. 

Salient features: 

· Enable Poor and Marginalized to Access Benefits 
Demand led skill training at no cost to the rural poor 
· Inclusive Program Design 
Mandatory coverage of socially disadvantaged groups (SC/ST 50%; Minority 15%; Women 
33%)

210 · Shifting Emphasis from Training to Career Progression 
Pioneers in providing incentives for job retention, career progression and foreign placements 

· Greater Support for Placed Candidates 
Post-placement support, migration support and alumni network 

· Proactive Approach to Build Placement Partnerships 
Guaranteed Placement for at least 75% trained candidates 

· Enhancing the Capacity of Implementation Partners 
Nurturing new training service providers and developing their skills 
· Regional Focus 
Greater emphasis on projects for poor rural youth in Jammu and Kashmir (HIMAYAT), the 
North -East region and 27 Left-Wing Extremist (LWE) districts (ROSHINI) 
· Standards -led Delivery 
All program activities are subject to Standard Operating Procedures that are not open to 
interpretation by local inspectors. All inspections are supported by geo -tagged, time stamped 
videos/photographs 

Structure of Scheme: 

DDU -GKY follows a 3 -tier implementation model. The DDU -GKY National Unit at MoRD 
functions as the policy -making, technical support and facilitation agency. The DDU -GKY State 
Missions provide implementation support; and the Project Implementing Agencies (PIAs) 
implement the programme through skilling and placement projects. 

Funding Pattern: 

The ratio of Central and State Government share is 60:40 for all states other than North -Eastern 
States including Sikkim where the ratio is 90:10. However in case of skilling projects under 
Himayat initiative in Jammu and Kashmir, the Central assistance shall be 100%. State 
Governments may contribute upto 10% of the project cost in kind (e.g. infrastructure facilities) 
as their share in the total project cost. 

Eligibility: 

• Rural youth between the ages of 15 and 35 years from poor families. 

• SC/ST/Women/Particularly vulnerable Tribal Groups/Persons with Disability: Upto 45 yrs. 

Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: http://ddugky.gov.in/

211 17.6 Name of Scheme: Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana – Gramin (PMAY -G) 

Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana – Gramin (PMAY -G) previously Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY), is a 
social welfare flagship programme, created by the Central Government, to provide housing for 
the rural poor in India. 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2016 
Objectives of the scheme: 
PMAY -G aims at providing a pucca house with basic amenities, to all houseless households and 
those households living in kutcha and dilapidated house, in rural areas by 2022. 

Salient features: 

Providing assistance for construction of 1.00 crore houses in rural areas over the period of 3 
years from 2016 -17 to 2018 - 19.The minimum size of the house has been increased to 25 sq.mt 
(from20sq.mt) with a hygienic cooking space. The unit assistance has been increased from Rs. 
70,000 to Rs. 1.20 lakh in plain and from Rs75,000 to Rs 1.30 lakh in hilly states, difficult areas 
and IAP district. The beneficiary is entitled to 90/95 person day of unskilled labour from 
MGNREGS. Provision of assistance (Rs. 12,000/ -) for toilets through convergence with Swacch 
Bharat Mission -Gramin (SBM -G), MGNREGS, or any other dedicated source of funding. 
Convergence for piped drinking water, electricity connection, LPG gas connection etc. different 
Government programmers are also to be attempted. Beneficiary is to be facilitated to avail loan 
up to Rs.70,000/ - if he so chooses from financial institutions. Focus on construction of quality 
houses using local materials, appropriate designs and trained masons. 

Funding Pattern: 

The cost of unit assistance is to be shared between Central and State Government in the ratio 
60:40 in plain areas and 90:10 for North Eastern and the Himalayan States. 

Eligibility: 

PMAY -G instead of selecting a the beneficiary from among the BPL households selects 
beneficiary using housing deprivation parameters in the Socio Economic and Caste Census 
(SECC), 2011 date which is to be verified by the Gram Sabhas. 

Area of Operation : Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana – Gramin will be implemented across the 
country except Delhi and Chandigarh. 

For detail Information visit: http://pmayg.nic.in/netiay/English_Book_Final.pdf

212 17.7 Name of Scheme: Shyama Prasad Mukherji Rurban Mission (SPMRM) 

The National Rurban Mission (NRuM) follows the vision of “Development of a cluster of 
villages that preserve and nurture the essence of rural community life with focus on equity and 
inclusiveness without compromising with the facilities perceived to be essentially urban in 
nature, thus creating a cluster of “Rurban Villages”. 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2016 
Objectives of the scheme: 
The objective of the National Rurban Mission (NRuM) is to stimulate local economic 
development, enhance basic services, and create well planned Rurban clusters 

Salient features: 

The larger outcomes envisaged under this Mission are: 

(i) Bridging the rural -urban divide -viz: economic, technological and those related to 
facilities and services. 
(ii) Stimulating local economic development with emphasis on reduction of poverty and 
unemployment in rural areas. 
(iii) Spreading development in the region. 
(iv) Attracting investment in rural areas. 

The Rurban clusters would be developed by provisioning of training linked to economic 
activities, developing skills & local entrepreneurship and by providing necessary infrastructure 
amenities. 

The following components are envisaged as desirable in each cluster: (i) Skill development 
training linked to economic activities (ii) Agro Processing, Agri Services, Storage and 
Warehousing. (iii) Fully equipped mobile health unit. (iv) Upgrading school/ higher education 
facilities. (v) Sanitation (vi) Provision of piped water supply. (vii) Solid and liquid waste 
management. (viii) Village streets and drains. (ix) Street lights (x) Inter -village road 
connectivity. (xi) Public transport. (xii) LPG gas connections (xiii) Digital literacy. (xiv) Citizen 
Service Centres (CSC) - for electronic delivery of citizen centric services/e -gram connectivity. 

Components pertaining to agriculture and allied activities would be required to be given special 
emphasis while developing these clusters. In order to achieve the above envisaged outcome, 
under NRuM, the State Government shall identify existing Central Sector, Centrally Sponsored 
and State Government Schemes relevant for the development of the cluster and converge their

213 implementation in an integrated and time bound manner. Under NRuM framework, Government 
of India shall provide Critical Gap Funding (CGF) to the clusters to supplement the shortfall in 
funding available through various Government schemes in achieving the outcomes desired for 
the cluster. In order to facilitate speedy convergence, the Ministry of Rural Development will 
request the respective Central Ministries/Departments for effecting changes in the guidelines of 
the Central Sector and Centrally sponsored schemes/ programmes to enable priority to be given 
to the GPs selected under the Mission and issue appropriate advisories to the State Governments/ 
UT administration for the same. 

Funding Pattern: 

There is a funding support of up to 30% of the estimated investment for each Rurban cluster, 
given as Critical Gap Funding (CGF), while 70% of the funds is mobilized by the States through 
convergence with synergic State and Central programmes as well as private investment and 
institutional funding. Upon being re -classified as a Centrally Sponsored Scheme, the CGF is now 
shared between the Centre and the State in a ratio of 60:40 for Plain area States and 90:10 for 
Himalayan and NE States. 

Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: http://rurban.gov.in/assets/download/pdf/FOI_book.pdf

214 Ministry of Textiles 

18.1 Name of Scheme: Cluster Development Project of Handloom in NER under North 
East Textiles Promotion Scheme 
Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2014 
Objectives: 
The main objective of the scheme is to develop handloom sector in NER by providing the 
required government support to achieve increase in employment and value of handloom products 
by means of improvement in design capability, diversification of product lines and value 
addition, cluster development and improvement in labour productivity through various 
interventions such as baseline survey, diagnostic study, formation of self help groups 
(SHGs)/joint liability groups (JLGs), formation of consortium, awareness programmes, 
engagement of designer, computer aided textile design (CATD) etc. The scheme is expected to 
have more impact and better outcomes than a strategy based on implementing other plan 
schemes of the Ministry of Textiles (MoT). Implementation of the project based strategy as 
envisaged in the NER Textile Promotion Scheme would not only enhance utilisation of 
earmarked funds but also, substantially contribute to the handloom sector development for the 
NE region. 
Salient features : 

Cluster Development Project (Assistance for handloom clusters, having handlooms in the 
range of 51- 200, 201- 500 & 501-2000) 

The cluster development approach focuses on formation of weavers‟ groups as a 
visible entity so that the groups become self-sustainable. Each cluster covering about 51- 
200, 201- 500 & 501-2000 handlooms would be taken up during the XII Plan period. 

The quantum of assistance for each cluster would be need based, depending on the 
requirement of the cluster, the scope of the activities envisaged in the cluster development 
project, technical, financial and managerial capacity of the Cluster Organization, level of 
maturity and past track record of the cluster etc. Maximum permissible GoI financial assistance 
per cluster will be as follows: 

Cluster having handlooms 51-200 upto Rs. 20-50 lakh per cluster 
Cluster having handlooms 201-500 upto Rs. 50 to 80 lakh per cluster 
Cluster having handlooms above 501-2000 upto Rs.80 to 150 lakh per cluster

215 One time assistance upto Rs.5 lakh towards purchase of requisite hardware and 
software for Computer Aided Textile Design (CATD) System, colour forecast, trend forecast 
and other allied requirement, including card punching machine (if required). In case, only one 
item i.e. Computer Aided Textile Design System (CATD) System or Card Punching Machine 
is required, financial assistance is restricted to Rs.2.50 lakh per item. Financial assistance for 
purchase of CATD system and Card Punching Machine will be shared equally between the 
Central Government and the State Government/Implementing Agency. 

Presently, weaver/agency is required to pay National Handloom Development 
Corporation (NHDC) an advance amount for purchase of yarn and the delivery of yarn is made 
by NHDC in a time frame of about 3 -4 weeks. This delays the production process. Thus, in 
order to ensure regular availability of yarn of requisite counts, one -time financial assistance 
upto Rs.2.00 lakh per cluster (51- 

200 handlooms) 3 lakh per cluster (201 -500 handlooms) and upto Rs. 5 lakh per cluster (501 - 
200 handlooms) will be provided as a Corpus Fund to the NHDC to enable it to ensure supply 
of yarn to the weavers through the yarn depot at the cluster. Yarn will be supplied to the 
weavers by the yarn depots against payment. 

Financial assistance would be available for setting up of Common Facility Centre, 
which may include pre -loom, on -loom and post -loom operations, quality control lab, value 
addition facility etc. Dye -house as a part of CFC or separately, if required, may also be set up, 
preferably with Water Treatment Plant and Effluent Treatment Plant (ETP). 

Financial assistance for setting up of these facilities will be shared between GoI and the 
State Govt./Entrepreneur/Implementing agency/ Consortium in the ratio of 90:10. The land 
cost will not include in the project cost and land will be provided by State 
Government/Entrepreneur/ Implementing agency/Consortium and land cost will be borne by 
them. 

Financial assistance will be provided to those weavers who do not have a work place of 
their own to house the handloom and are working on the handloom of the Master Weaver/Co - 
operative Society etc. at some other place. Details of the financial assistance to be provided 
are as follows: 

 
Construction of 
workshed (20 sq. mtrs.) Rs. 40,000/ - 100% by GoI for BPL weavers, 75% 
by the GoI and 25% by the State 
Govt. for APL weavers

216 Under this component, preference will be given to the weavers Below the Poverty Line 
(BPL). For construction of houses, the weavers may avail assistance under Indira Awas Yojana 
of the Ministry of Rural Development while assistance towards Workshed can be availed by 
them under this Scheme. Weavers other than BPL will be considered only after the weavers 
falling under BPL are covered as far as possible. The entire assistance of Rs 40,000 will be 
met by the Central Government in the case of weavers falling under BPL, while the weavers 
other than those falling under BPL will be assisted by the Central Govt. to the extent of 75% 
i.e. 26,250/ - and the remaining to be borne by the State Govt./beneficiary. A certificate 
to the effect that the title of land is in the weaver‟s name has to be furnished. 

To implement, co-ordinate and manage the activities of the Cluster, Cluster 
Development Executive (CDE) will be engaged by the Implementing Agency in consultation 
with the State Government and the Weavers‟ Service Centre concerned. The CDE should be 
qualified technical personnel, preferably from Indian Institute of Handloom Technology 
(IIHT)/State Government Polytechnic/ITI etc. with a field experience of atleast 2 years in 
Textile Unit/Cluster etc. Rs.15,000/ - p.m. per CDE will be paid. This includes the fee/salary of 
the CDE, travel, internet & telephone rent and other office/miscellaneous expenses. If 
clusters are adjoining, then one CDE will look after 2-3 clusters. 
Duration of the cluster is maximum 4 years from the date sanction of 1st instalment. 

S. 
No. Components of Cluster 
Development Project Financial assistance per cluster and sharing 
pattern for NER under NERTPS 
A. Size of the cluster, maximum 
GoI funding and duration i) 51-200 handlooms per cluster, Rs. 20-50 
lakh and 3 years. 
ii) 201-500 handlooms per cluster, Rs. 50-80 
lakh and 4 years. 
iii) 501-2000 handlooms per cluster, Rs. 80 -150 
lakh and 4 years. 

Note: a) Not more than Rs. 50 lakh will 
be sanctioned to an individual village. 
b) Not more than Rs. 3 crore will be sanctioned 
to an individual Block. 
i. Sub-components of the 
Cluster Development 
Programme 
ii. Baseline survey, diagnostic 
study and formation of self 
help groups (SHGs)/joint 
liability groups (JLGs), 
formation of consortium, 
awareness programmes Upto Rs. 2.00 lakh (100% GoI)

217 Iii Product development/ 
diversification Rs. 2.00 lakh (100% GoI) 
iv Engagement of 
Designer -cum- 
Marketing Executive Rs. 15,000 p.m. per cluster per designer. 
If clusters are adjoining, then one designer will 
look after 2-3 clusters and will be paid Rs. 
20,000 p.m. (100% GoI) 
V Purchase of computer aided 
textile design system 
(CATD) system, including 
purchase of card punching 
machine (if required). If 
only single item is required, 
total eligible amount is Rs. 
2.50 lakh Rs. 5.00 lakh to be shared in the ratio of 90:10 by 
the GoI: State Govt/IA/beneficiary 
vi Corpus fund for setting up 
of yarn depot Rs. 5.00 lakh (100% GoI) 
vii Skill up-gradation As far as possible, it will be converted with 
Integrated Skill Development Scheme (ISDS). As 
per the pattern of ISDS. 
vii 
i Setting up of common 
facility centre/dye house Upto to Rs. 20 lakh to be shared in the ratio of 
90:10 by the GoI: State Govt./IA/beneficiary 
ix Credit support Convergence with RRR package. 
x Documentation of 
cluster activities Rs. 25,000/ - (100% GoI) 
xi Construction of 
workshed for individual (20 
sq. mtrs.) Upto Rs. 40,000/ - per workshed (100% by GoI for 
BPL weavers, 75% by the GoI for APL weavers.) 
xii Project Management 
Cost (engaging CDE) Rs. 15,000/ - p.m. per CDE per cluster. If clusters are 
adjoining, then one CDE will look after 2 -3 clusters. 
(100% GoI) 
Xi 
ii Group workshed Upto Rs. 3.00 lakh per workshed to be shared in the 
ratio of 90:10 by the GoI: State Govt./IA/beneficiary 
xi 
v Solar lighting in group 
workshed Rs. 50,000 per workshed to be shared in the ratio of 
90:10 by the GoI: State Govt./IA/beneficiary.

218 Any other component on need basis and 
approved by the DC (Handlooms)/PAMC 

 
Funding Pattern : 100% Grant by Government of India. 

Eligibility : 

Agencies eligible to implement new clusters are as follows: 

1. State Directorate of Handlooms & Textiles/Industries (where handlooms are 
under their control) 

2. National Level Handloom Organizations 

3. State Handloom Development Corporations 

4. State Apex Handloom Weavers‟ Co-operative Societies 

5. Central Government Organizations 

6. Non Government Organizations, engaged in the handlooms (recommended by the 
State Govt. and approved by the DC (Handlooms) 

7. Any other Organization, engaged in the handlooms {(recommended by the State 
Govt. and approved by the DC (Handlooms)} 

Area of Operation: All North eastern states. 

For detail Information visit: http://handlooms.nic.in/writereaddata/1233.pdf 

 

 
18.2 Name of Scheme: Technological Upgradation of Handlooms in NER 

The primary aim of the NER Textile Promotion Scheme is to develop and modernize the 
handloom sector in north east states by providing required government support to achieve 
better productivity, increase in employment and value of handloom products through 
various interventions by means of improvement in design capability, diversification of 
product lines and value addition, upgrading technology and improvement in labour 
productivity by providing pneumatic jacquard system dobby, healds, reeds, bobbins shuttles, 
harness etc. Besides, the scheme will focus to improve efficiency and quality of products by

219 warp beam and fabric beam, take -ups & let off motions, using multiple box motion for 
continuous weaving of two different kinds of weft, multiple buti weaving sley for weaving 
butis, twin cloth weaving mechanism for weaving mats, stoles etc., purchase of new 
handloom, normal/ motorized warping machine etc. 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2014 
Objectives: 
In order to raise the standard of living of the weavers by having more earnings and also to 
contribute significantly in the development of handlooms of NER, there is need to up -grade 
the existing handlooms and also, to commercialize these handlooms to produce newly 
developed/diversified the product range so that these are not only sold outside the NER but 
also abroad 

Salient features : 

An illustrative list of possible technological interventions is as follows: 

• providing pneumatic jacquard system and motorized jacquard on the 
existing handloom, 
• providing take-up & let off motions on the existing handloom, 
• using multiple box motion for continuous weaving of two different kinds 
of weft, 
• using multiple buti weaving sley for weaving butis, 
• twin cloth weaving mechanism for weaving mats, stoles etc of narrow 
width having clear selvedges on both sides, 
• providing jacquard on the existing handloom, 
• providing dobby on the existing handloom, 
• providing healds, reeds, bobbins, shuttles, harness etc. to improve 
efficiency and the quality of the products. 
• providing warp beam and fabric beam on the existing handloom, 
• purchase of new handloom, 
• purchase of normal/motorized warping machine, 
• any other technological up-gradation, which reduces drudgery to the 
handloom weavers/workers and improve productivity. 
• committee 

Any technological Innovation/up -gradation/improvement, other than above identified 
by the committee will also be considered on need basis of the cluster.

220 On identification of the items required for technological up -gradation of handlooms 
and finalization of technical specifications of each item, State Government will be 
required to empanel suppliers with the approval of DC (Handloom). To carry out 
procurement of looms and/or loom parts/items, the following procedure is prescribed for the 
guidance of State Governments of NER. 

Funding Pattern : 

Under the proposed scheme for NER, under NERTPS funding for technological up- 
gradation of the handlooms, dobby, jacquard and accessories will be provided to the 
extent of 90% of the cost of the handloom by the GoI and remaining 10 % by the 
Implementing agency/beneficiary. The cost of handloom would be upto Rs. 20,000/ -. 
Dobby, jacquard and accessories, wherever required will also be eligible for assistance @ 
upto Rs. 8,000 per jacquard, @ upto Rs. 5,000 per dobby and other accessories @ upto Rs. 
4,000/ - per loom. 

Area of Operation: All North Eastern States 

For detail Information visit:handlooms.nic.in/writereaddata/1234.pdf 

 

 
18.3 Name of Scheme: Market promotion of North Eastern Textiles & Handloom products 
under NER Textile promotion scheme (NERTPS) 

Handloom sector plays a dominant role in the cultural and economic development of the 
rural masses in majority of the north eastern states. Almost all tribes and communities in the 
hills and the plains of the region are actively engaged in this activity and bulk of the handloom 
output is contributed by people residing in hills and rural areas. 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2014 
Objectives: 
The objective of projects of market promotion of north eastern textiles & handloom products 
under NERTPS is to increase the handloom fabric production by way of establishing market 
linkages, to encourage innovation in designs and techniques for improvement in design 
capability, diversification of product lines and value addition, better access to domestic and 
export markets so that weavers are able to get continuous employment and improve their 
living standards.

221 Salient features : 

The schemes contain the following components: 

1. National level handloom expo within NER 

2. National level handloom expo organised outside NER 

3. Participation in international fairs/exhibitions 

4. Organisation of BSM/reverse BSM 

5. Designer intervention for marketing support 

6. Organisation of fashion shows, quiz shows etc. 

7. Engagement of brand ambassador for promotion of handloom products of NER 

8. Development of online portal 

9. IEC activities 

1. National level handloom expo within NER: 

National level handloom expo of NER will be organised in major cities for a period not less 
than 14 days. There will be at least 80 to 100 participants in the expo. In order to provide 
wide choice to consumers in the expo, upto 20% of total number of stalls may be allotted to 
handloom weavers or their agencies of general states. One stall may be allotted to Textiles 
Committee for dissemination of information on “ handloom mark” and issue of handloom 
mark labels. 

I. Participants: 

i. All levels of NER handloom cooperative societies, corporations/federations 

ii. Self-help groups (SHG) /JLGs of NER engaged in handloom production 

iii. Non-Government organisations engaged in handloom and fulfilling the norms laid by 
CAPART 

iv. Weaver entrepreneurs of NER engaged in handloom weaving 

v. Sant kabir awardees, national awardees, state awardees & outstanding weavers 

vi. Consortia/ producer companies and SPVs of handloom clusters

222 vii. Members registered with Handloom Export Promotion Council (HEPC) 

viii. Agencies registered under handloom mark 

II. Implementing agencies: 

a. All State Director of Handlooms & Textiles of NER 

b. State Handloom Development Corporations/ apex handloom co -operative societies of 
NER 

c. National Handloom Development Corporation (NHDC) Ltd., 

d. Association of Corporations and Apex Societies of Handlooms (ACASH) 

e. Handloom Export Promotion Council ( HEPC) 

III. Funding pattern : 

Financial assistance upto Rs.37.50 lakh will be provided towards meeting the expenditure 
on infrastructure, publicity, administrative expenses etc., out of which, upto Rs.5 lakh will 
be allocated to be paid as lump sum grant @ Rs.5,000/ - per participant to meet the travel 

& transportation cost, insurance e t c . The component -wise ceiling of expenditure is 
given below: 

Sl.No. Component Amount ( Rs. in lakh) 
1 Stall rent / infrastructure 18.00 
2. Electricity charges 3.00 
3. Participants lumpsum assistance 5.00 (Rs.5000/ - per participant upto 
100 participants) 
4. Publicity expenses 7.50 
5. Backup services 2.00 
6. Administrative expenses including 
Rs.10,000 for inspection by WSC. 1.50 
7. Theme pavilion including display 0.50 
 Total 37.50

223 IV. Release of funds : 

50% of the sanctioned fund will be released as advance to meet preparatory expenses. 
Balance amount or the actual expenditure incurred, whichever is less, will be reimbursed 
on submission of detailed audited statement of accounts, UC for the advance received, 
statement of receipt and payment, performance report, copy of receipt for ground rent, 
electricity charges, publicity material etc. 

Nationa l level handloom expo outside NER: 

National level handloom expo of north eastern region will be organised outside NER in 
cities having population above 25 lakh. The exhibition will be organised for a period not 
less than 14 days. There should be minimum 80-100 participants in the expo. In order to 
provide wide choice to consumers in the expo, upto 20% of total number of s talls may be 
allotted to handloom weavers or their agencies of general states. One stall may be allotted to 
Textiles Committee for dissemination of information on Handloom mark and issue of 
handloom mark labels. 

I. Participants: The following are the participants of NER only: 

1. All levels of NER handloom cooperative societies, corporations/federations 

2. Self-help groups (SHG) /JLGs of NER engaged in handloom production 

3. Non-Government organisations engaged in handloom and fulfilling the norms laid 
by CAPART 

4. Weaver entrepreneurs of NER engaged in handloom weaving 

5. Sant kabir awardees, national awardees, state awardees & outstanding weavers 

6. Consortia/ producer companies and SPVs of handloom clusters 

7. Members registered with Handloom Export Promotion Council (HEPC) 

8. Agencies registered under handloom mark 

II. Implementing agencies: 

a. All State Director of Handlooms & Textiles of NER 

b. State Handloom Development Corporations/ apex handloom co-operative societies 
of NER 

c. National Handloom Development Corporation (NHDC) Ltd.

224 d. Association of Corporations and Apex Societies of Handlooms (ACASH) 

e. Handloom Export Promotion Council ( HEPC) 

III. Funding pattern : 

Financial assistance upto Rs.41.00 lakh w i l l be provided towards meeting the expenditure 
on infrastructure, publicity, administrative expenses etc. out of which upto Rs.9.50 lakh 
will be allocated to be paid as lump sum grant @ Rs.12,000/ - per participant to meet the 
travel & transportation cost, insurance etc. The component -wise ceiling of expenditure is 
given below: 

Sl.No. Component Amount. (Rs.in lakh) 
1 Stall rent / infrastructure 18.00 
2. Electricity charges 3.00 
3. Participants lumpsum assistance 9.00 ( Rs.12000/ - per participant ) 
4. Publicity expenses 7.50 
5. Backup services 2.00 
6. Administrative expenses including 
Rs.20,000 for inspection by WSC. 1.00 
7. Theme pavilion including display 0.50 
 Total 41.00 

 
IV. Release of funds : 

50% of the sanctioned fund will be released as advance to meet preparatory expenses. 
Balance amount or the actual expenditure incurred, whichever is less, will be reimbursed 
on submission of detailed audited statement of accounts, UC for the advance received, 
statement of receipt and payment, performance report, copy of receipt for ground rent, 
electricity charges, publicity material etc. 

Participation in international fairs: 

The objective of participation in international fairs and exhibitions is to provide marketing 
platform in the overseas markets for marketing of handloom products of NER, exposure to 
the international market and international publicity of handloom items.

225 I. Participants: The following are the eligible participants of NER: 

i. Handloom exporters 
ii. Weaver entrepreneurs 
iii. Individual weavers 
iv. Handloom agencies of NER 

II. Implementing agencies: 

i. All State Director of Handlooms & Textiles of NER 

ii. State Handloom Development Corporations/ apex handloom cooperative societies of 
NER 

iii. Association of Corporations and Apex Societies of Handlooms (ACASH) 

iv. Handloom Export Promotion Council ( HEPC) 

III. Funding pattern: 

i) Infrastructure: Upto Rs. 40.00 lakh would be given for space rent, stall 
construction/decoration, maintenance including administrative expenses and will 
also include TA, DA, boarding, lodging etc., of one person of implementing agency, 
who will be deputed for coordination purpose. 

ii) Publicity: Financial assistance upto Rs. 10.00 lakh will be provided to the 
implementing agency for publicity, catalogues, brochures etc. 

iii) Transportation of goods & travel grant to participants: Transportation of goods 
and travel cost would be provided as per actuals subject to maximum of Rs.75,000/ - 
per weaver. 

iv) DA to participants: DA to participants will be provide as per admissibility 
according to MEA. 

IV. Release of funds : 

50% of the sanctioned fund will be released as advance to meet preparatory expenses. 
Balance amount or the actual expenditure incurred, whichever is less, will be reimbursed 
on submission of detailed audited statement of accounts, UC for the advance received, 
statement of receipt and payment, performance report etc. 

4. Organisation of Buyer seller meet /Reverse buyer seller meet:

226 Market penetration through participation in buyer seller meet including reverse buyer 
seller meet will be undertaken. Assistance for visit of prominent buyers and representative of 
leading buying houses etc., for visiting BSMs in India will be provided. 

I. Implementing agencies : 

i. All State Director of Handlooms & Textiles of NER 

ii. State Handloom Development Corporations/ apex handloom cooperative societies of 
NER 
iii. Association of Corporations and Apex Societies of Handlooms (ACASH) 

iv. Handloom Export Promotion Council ( HEPC) 

v. National Handloom Development Corporation Ltd. (NHDC) 

II. Funding pattern: 

Financial assistance upto Rs.40 lakh will be provided towards organising BSM/reverse 
BSM for venue cost, stall rent, stall decoration /maintenance, publicity, cost of catalogues, 
translation and interpreter charges, administrative expenses and any other component 
required for the purpose. Travel grant, boarding / lodging would be actual expenditure 
incurred or Rs.1.00 lakh per buyer, whichever is less. 

III. Release of funds : 

50% of the sanctioned fund will be released as advance to meet preparatory expenses. 
Balance amount or the actual expenditure incurred, whichever is less, will be reimbursed 
on submission of detailed audited statement of accounts, UC for the advance received, 
statement of receipt and payment, performance report, publicity material etc. 

5. Designer intervention for marketing support: 

Leading designers will be engaged to work in potentially viable / traditionally known 
clusters of NER to diversify handloom products and to develop handloom products suited 
to contemporary taste, train by internship or apprenticeship to local designers /master 
weavers, bring their collection to fashion design council or other similar international 
organisation platforms to market the products and establish marketing linkage. 

I. Implementing agencies: 

i. All State Directors of Handlooms & Textiles of NER

227 ii. State Handloom Development Corporations/ apex handloom cooperative societies of 
NER 

iii. National Handloom Development Corporation (NHDC) Ltd. 

iv. Association of Corporations and Apex Societies of Handlooms (ACASH) 

v. Handloom Export Promotion Council ( HEPC) 

II. Funding pattern : Financial assistance will be provided for the following 
interventions: 

i. Designer honorarium including travel cost 

ii. Training to 5 local designers / national awardees 

iii. Samples development 

iv. Modification of looms / accessories 

v. Documentation /catalogue 

vi. Assistance for fashion show / international exhibition for brand promotion, BSM 
etc. 
vii. Project management cost to IA 

viii. Engaging technical person 

ix. Provision of CAD/CAM, creation / upgradation of dyeing facility etc. 

x. Brand promotion 

xi. Miscellaneous activities. 

Project Monitoring Committee will be constituted under the chairmanship of Development 
Commissioner (Handlooms) with the approval of competent authority for approval of the 
project. The funding will be considered on merit basis by Development Commissioner for 
Handlooms with an upper ceiling of Rs.one crore per project. 

III. Release of funds : 

50% of the sanctioned fund will be released as advance to meet preparatory expenses. 
Balance amount or the actual expenditure incurred, whichever is less, will be reimbursed

228 on submission of detailed audited statement of accounts, UC for the advance received, 
statement of receipt and payment, performance report etc. 

6. Organisation of fashion shows: 

Fashion shows will be organised to promote handloom traditions of the northeast, 
especially for the national and international market. It will also bring the traditional 
handloom products on forefront among fashion industry not only in the country but also at 
international level. 

I. Implementing agencies: 

i. All State Directors of Handlooms & Textiles of NER 

ii. State Handloom Development Corporations/ apex handloom cooperative societies 
of NER 

iii. National Handloom Development Corporation (NHDC) Ltd., 

iv. Association of Corporations and Apex Societies of Handlooms (ACASH) 

v. Handloom Export Promotion Council ( HEPC) 

II. Funding pattern: 

Financial assistance upto Rs.15.00 lakh will be provided for organising the fashion show. 
However, in exceptional cases, when fashion shows is organised in a special way involving 
celebrities etc., at metropolitan cities. The funding limit may be enhanced by Development 
Commissioner for Handlooms on need and merit basis. 

III. Release of funds : 

50% of the sanctioned fund will be released as advance to meet preparatory expenses. 
Balance amount or the actual expenditure incurred, whichever is less, will be reimbursed 
on submission of detailed audited statement of accounts, UC for the advance received, 
statement of receipt and payment, performance report, publicity material etc. 

7. Engagement of brand ambassador for promotion of handloom products of NER: 

A need has been felt to have brand ambassador for promoting handlooms, to create 
awareness and increase popularity among younger generation. For this purpose, financial 
assistance will be provided and a suitable brand ambassador for North East may be 
engaged.

229 I. Implementing agencies: 

i. All State Directors of Handlooms & Textiles of NER 

ii. State Handloom Development Corporations/ apex handloom cooperative societies of 
NER 

iii. National Handloom Development Corporation (NHDC) Ltd. 

iv. Association of Corporations and Apex Societies of Handlooms (ACASH) 

v. Handloom Export Promotion Council ( HEPC) 

II. Funding pattern : 

The proposal will be considered on merit by a committee constituted by Development 
Commissioner for Handlooms and funding limit will be approved by Development 
Commissioner (Handlooms). 

III. Release of funds : 

50% of the sanctioned fund will be released as advance to meet preparatory expenses. 
Balance amount or the actual expenditure incurred, whichever is less, will be reimbursed 
on submission of detailed audited statement of accounts, UC for the advance received, 
publicity made and other required documents.. 

8. Development of on-line web portal: 

Financial assistance for development of web portal with the objective of serving as a 
resource centre and provide e-marketing platform with b2b and b2c facility will be 
provided. The web site will be a single point easy access to information pertaining to 
policies and schemes, map of NER clusters with product details, traditional weaving 
techniques, productwise and regionwise information about handloom product, designer 
data base, payment gateway etc. Only one website for a state will be developed. 

I. Implementing agencies: 

i. All State Directors of Handlooms & Textiles of NER 

ii. State Handloom Development Corporations/ apex handloom cooperative societies of 
NER 

iii. National Handloom Development Corporation (NHDC) Ltd., 

iv. Association of Corporations and Apex Societies of Handlooms (ACASH)

230 v. Handloom Export Promotion Council ( HEPC) 

II. Funding pattern : 

The proposal will be considered on merit by Development Commissioner for Handlooms 
and funding limit will be approved by Development Commissioner (Handlooms). 

III. Release of funds : 

50% will be released as advance to meet preparatory expenses. Balance amount or the 
actual expenditure incurred whichever is less will be reimbursed on submission of detailed 
audited statement of accounts, UC for the advance received statement of receipt and 
payment, performance report etc. 

9. IEC activities: 

Financial assistance will be provided for printing of brochures, production of films, 
documentaries & telefilm, organisation of seminars and workshops, road shows, live 
demonstrations and for an y other miscellaneous promotional activities for promotion of 
handloom products of NER. 5% of budget allocation would be earmarked for IEC activities. 

I. Implementing agencies: 

i. All State Directors of Handlooms & Textiles of NER 

ii. State Handloom Development Corporations/ apex handloom cooperative societies 
of NER 

iii. National Handloom Development Corporation (NHDC) Ltd. 

iv. Association of Corporations and Apex Societies of Handlooms (ACASH) 

v. Handloom Export Promotion Council ( HEPC) 

II. Funding pattern: 

The proposals will be considered on merit by Development Commissioner for Handlooms 
and funding limit will be approved by Development Commissioner (Handlooms) on merit 
of the proposal. 

III. Release of funds : 

50% will be released to the implementing agency as advance to meet preparatory expenses. 
Balance amount or the actual expenditure incurred whichever is will be reimbursed on

231 submission of detailed audited statement of accounts, UC for the advance received, 
statement of receipt and payment, performance report etc. 

Funding Pattern : 100% Grant by Government of India. 

Eligibility : 

Area of Operation: All North Eastern States 

For detail Information visit: http:handlooms.nic.in/writereaddata/1235.pdf 

 

 
18.4 Name of Scheme: Amended Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme 
Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2015 

Objectives: 
1. In order to promot e ease of doing business in the country and achieve the vision of generati ng 
employment and prom oting exports through "Make in India" with "Zero effect and Zero defect" 
in manufa cturing, it has been decided that the Governm ent would p rovide credit link ed Capital 
Investment Subsidy (CIS) under Amended Technology Upgradat ion Fund Scheme (ATUFS ). 
2. The scheme woul d facilitate augm enting of invest ment, productivity, quality, employment, 
exports alo ng with i mport substituti on in the textile industry. It will also indirectly promote 
investment in textile machin ery (having benchmar ked technolo gy) manufa cturing. 

Salient features : 
Eligibility for Capital Investment Subsidy 
3.1. Capital Investment Subsidy (CIS) will be available only to the entities for invest ment on 
technology upgradation in the following segments : 
(a) Weaving , Weaving Preparatory and knitting 
(b) Process ing of fibres , yarns, fabrics, garments and made -ups 
(c) Technical textiles 
(d) Garme nt I made -up manufacturing 
(e) Handloo m Sector 
(f) Silk Sector 
(g) Jute Secto r 

Norms for subsidy :

232 1. Every el igible ind ividual entity (not the unit) will be e ntitled for re imbursement of Capi tal 
Investment Subsi dy (CIS) unde r this scheme , as pe r the following rates : 

Sl.No Segment Rate of Capita l 
Inves tment Subs idy 
(CIS) 
1. Garmenting, Technical Textiles 
2. Weaving for brand new Shuttle-less Looms 
(including weav ing preparatory and kni tting), 
Processing , Jute, Silk and 
Hand loom. 10% subject to an upper limit of Rs 
20 crores 
3 (a) Composi te un it /Multiple Segments - If the 
eligible capital investme nt in respect of 
Garmenting and Tech nical Textiles category 
is more than 50% of the eligible projec t cost. 15% subject to an upper li mit of Rs 
30 crores 
3 (b) Composi te unit/Multiple Segments - If the 
eligible capital inves tment in respect of 
Garmen ting and Technical Textiles category 
is less than 50% of the eligible 
project cost. 10% subject to an upper l imit of Rs 
20 crores 

2. In case the e ntity had availed subsidy earlier u nder RRTUFS , it will be el igible to the extent of 
balance subsi dy for new or existing units within the overa ll ceiling fixed for an individual entity. 
3. The scheme is cred it linked. The capital investment subs idy (CIS) shall be a vailable to t he 
entity on ava iling term loan from a no tified lending agen cy with m inimum 50 % of the tot al 
eligible machinery cost unde r the projec t. 
4. In order to ens ure that the ava ilment of subsidy remains within the prescribed ce iling, the 
entity will be requ ired to furn ish a declaration of the subs idy availed by it under the RRTU FS 
and the ATUFS. 
5. CIS wi ll be rele ased to the entity in full in one go on e ligible investment after satisfactory 
installation/comm issioning and commencement of production . 
Textile units are permitted to ava il of bene fits of Sta te Go vernm ent's Sc hemes , in add ition to the 
bene fit provided under this scheme. 
The sc heme wo uld be imp lemented by th e Textile Comm issioner through robu st web based 
software called i-TUFS. 
Release of the eligible subsidy to the entity 's accoun t: 
1 After approval by Textile Commissioner , automatic challan will be gene rated in i-TUFS. 
2 Textile Co mmissioner will send the challan to the Ministry and Ministry w ill release the 
subsidy into t he account of the enti ty within 15 worki ng days of receipt of the Cha llan in the 
Ministry

233 3 Full am ount wi ll be rel eased i n case the applicant has taken loan from one le nding agency 
under ATUFS. In case the applicant has availed down-selling of term loan or consortium 
financing, the subsidy amount will be credited into the account of the loanee on pro-rata basis. 

Area of Operation: All North Eastern States 

For detail Information visit: 
http://texmin.nic.in/sites/default/files/revised_atufs_guideline_02082018_1.pdf 

 

 
18.5 Schemes of the National Handicraft Development Programme for development and 
promotion of Handicrafts Sector 
Handicrafts constitute an important segment of the de -centralized/unorganized sector of our 
economy. It is mainly a rural based sector which has its reach in backward and in-accessible 
areas. Originally, handicraft started as a part time activity in the rural areas, however it has now 
transformed into a flourishing economic activity due to significant market demand over the 
years. Handicrafts have big potential as they hold the key for sustaining not only the existing set 
of millions of artisans, but also for increasingly large number of new entrants in the crafts 
activity. Presently, handicraft sector is contributing substantially towards employment 
generation and exports but this sector has suffered due to its unorganized nature along with 
additional constraints like lack of education, capital, and poor exposure to new technologies, 
absence of market intelligence and poor institutional framework. 
The National Handicraft Development Programme for development and promotion of 
Handicrafts Sector has the following three components: 
A. Ambedkar Hastshilp Vikas Yojana 
B. Marketing Support 
C. Research and Development 

A. Ambedkar Hastshilp Vikas Yojana 

(A) (I) Dastkar Shashktikaran Yojana 

(a) Community empowerment for mobilization of artisans into self-help groups 
(SHGs)/Societies: 
Objective and methodology : 

Mobilization of the beneficiaries shall be undertaken in the clusters which needs to be taken up 
for development. The Geographical identity of such clusters should be clearly mentioned and

234 limited to a village in Rural Areas or a ward in the Municipal areas. In special cases a cluster may 
contain adjoining villages within a span or diameter of three kilometers. This activity shall 
include mobilizing the artisans into SHGs, thrift and credit, training of SHGs on various aspects 
of forming and running the community business enterprise. With introduction of economic 
reforms through liberalization, privatization and globalization, India has entered into a new era of 
economic development and therefore, Community Empowerment programme for handicrafts 
sector/ cooperative/ SHGs is a must to empower the artisans by making them active 
entrepreneurscum -primary stake holders of development and bringing them to a visible platform 
which will help enhance their operational efficiency and competitiveness to face the new 
challenges and make them viable and self-supporting economic entity. While undertaking 
mobilization, care should be taken to leverage upon the SHGs already formed under various 
programmes being implemented by Government. Only where it is not feasible to do so, new 
SHGs, federation etc., should be formed. 
Deliverables: 

• Conduct survey of each artisan in the prescribed format • Mobilisation of artisans groups/SHG 
formation with office bearers, • Holding awareness camps for cluster artisans, discussion and 
formation of Annual action Plan of the activities, • Opening of Bank accounts of SHGs. • 
Facilitating opening of Bank accounts of Individual artisans under Jan Dhan Yojna, • Issue of 
Artisans‟ Identity Cards (AIC) to all cluster artisans, • Processing of the surveyed data in MS 
Excel Sheet format containing artisans‟ details such as identity card No., Photographs, Aadhar 
no., EPIC No., bank Account No. with bank name. • Covering each artisan under RSBY and 
AABY Scheme, • Appointment of cluster Manager as per qualification and experience, • 
Formation and registration of Producer Company/ Federation/Institutions with at least 50% of the 
Cluster artisans as members/ shareholders. 
Financial assistance and funding pattern: 

• Financial Assistance will be provided to the tune of INR 300/ - per artisan for the number of 
persons to be surveyed and mobilized for empowerment in the form of grant in aid. • Financial 
assistance will be provided for a maximum of Rs 1 lakh per year for a maximum of three years 
for formation of Producer Company/ Federation/Institution. • 100% of the amount shall be 
released after registration as advance for the first year to the organization for formation and 
registration of Producer Company/ Federation/Institutions. From the second year onwards the 
organization will be provided 75% of their annual recurring expenditure in advance subject to a 
maximum of Rs 1 lakh, which will be reduced to 50% for the third year subject to a maximum of 
Rs 1 lakh. The grants will be released subject to the suitable conditions fulfilled by the 
organizations. The amount will be provided directly to the account of the organization. • In so far 
as possible existing SHGs formed under different schemes of Government of India and State 
Government should be leveraged. In short formation of new SHGs should be done only where no 
SHGs exist.

235 (b) Preparation of DPR/ DSR: 

After formation identification of the SHGs/Society, the concerned Implementing Agency will 
prepare a diagnostic study report (DSR) in consultation with the stake holders and the Assistant 
Director of the local Marketing & Service Extension Centre for proposing further interventions in 
the cluster. In case of bigger clusters the Third Party Consultant/ Appraisers/ Moderator will 
study the data base of the handicraft cluster and prepare a composite DPR in consultation and 
participation of the artisans and the agency engaged for empowerment and also local government 
which will include the diagnostic study, interventions to be carried out in the cluster and the 
financial requirements for implementing the programmes contained in the DPR. The moderator 
will also monitor the programmes during the implementation. 
Eligibility: 
The DPR/DSR will be prepared by the implementing agency in consultation with departmental 
officers. The requirements of handicrafts sector such as design input, marketing support, and 
training requirement are well known and there is ample institutional knowledge with the 
department in this regard. The departmental officers will assist the Implementing agency in 
preparation of the proposal and implementation thereof. Services of consultants for preparation of 
DPR may be taken only in cases having sizable financial implications and depending upon 
requirement only. In case, it is desirable to engage Third party Consultants/ 
Appraisers/Moderators, the same shall be appointed by the O/o DC (Handicrafts) from among the 
empanelled agencies. The third party Consultant should appoint a dedicated and qualified person 
for hand -holding purposes for three years or the project duration whichever is earlier. 
Financial assistance and funding pattern: 

Financial Assistance will be provide up to a maximum of Rs.2.00 lakh per annum per appraiser/ 
moderator for a period of 3 years in case of third party consultants. Nil in case of implementing 
agency 
(c) Project Management Cost including Wage compensation to cluster manager: 

Implementing agency will be responsible for over all project management, implementation of 
various interventions in a timely and effective manner with a view to facilitate bulk production 
and sourcing of goods. 
Financial assistance and funding pattern: 

In case of implementing agencies, an amount of Rs 5 lakh per annum will be given for a period of 
three years towards Project Management Cost. 
Eligible organizations:

236 • Eligible Non -Governmental Organizations, local statutory bodies, Apex cooperative Societies 
and National level Apex Societies (registered under society act/ trust act, etc.) and organization 
like COHANDS, EPCH, CEPC, Sector Skill Councils and its affiliated Bodies, MHSC, IICT, 
NCDPD, HMCM, Hastkala Academy, NIFT, NID, University Department., DRDA, NISIET, 
EDIs, and other similar bodies. 
• Central/ State Handloom and Handicrafts Development Corporations and other Govt. 
Corporations/ agencies promoted by State Government or organization promoted by Financial 
Institutions/banks, university departments, 
• Any component can be implemented departmentally as well. 

Mode of payment: 

• Funds will be released in 2 installments • 50% of the sanctioned amount will be released as first 
installment and balance amount will be released as second and final installment in the shape of 
reimbursement after receipt of requisite audited statement of expenditure, UC in GFR -19A 
format, performance cum outcome report and other required documents, etc. • In case of 
departmental activity, 100% payment will be drawn as advance. 
(A) (II) Design & Technology Up-gradation 

The objective of the workshop is to develop new prototypes to suit the tastes and preferences of 
contemporary market using the traditional skill of artisans and introduction of new techniques 
and technologies for enhanced production. 
Duration and participation: 
• 25 days subject to a minimum of 125 hours of training. 

• No. of participants per workshop: up to 30 artisans 

• One month can be taken for market survey, intelligence gathering and test marketing, 
modifications, etc. including compulsory participation in one marketing event. 
Financial assistance and funding pattern: 
• The total financial ceiling is maximum of INR 3,37,500/ -. 

• Assistance shall be in the form of 100% grantin -aid by O/o DC(H) 

(ii) Integrated design and technology development project 

The project has three essential components comprising design development, technology 
development, techniques/process and formulation and publication of crafts design/craft 
technology to the large number of artisans for their skill up gradation.

237 Duration and participation: 

The duration of the project is retained at 5 months with the following break -up: • 3 months for 
design development (25 days – 125 hours per month) • 1 month for preliminary survey and • 1 
months of market testing and refinement of the product and batch production • No. of 
participants per project: 40 artisans. 

Financial assistance and funding pattern • Financial parameters are given in the following table: 
Sl.No Expense Head (for a duration of 5 
months for 40 artisans) Maximum permissible 
assistance (INR) 
 Fee for one Designer or master 
craftsperson* INR 55,000/ - per month 
including TA for a period of 5 months. 2,75,000 
 Market survey, intelligence gathering and 
test marketing, modifications, etc. 
including participation in 2 marketing 
events 70,000 
 Compensation for the cost of raw 
materials for development of prototypes 
(2 set of 25 prototypes)** 100,000 
 Cost of documentation, report, etc 50,000 
 Wage compensation/ stipend to 40 crafts 
persons @ INR 150/ - per day for 25 days 
per month for a period of 3 months (125 
hrs. per month) 4,50,000 
 Miscellaneous expenditure (stationery, 
telephone, refreshments, publicity, repair 
of machinery, biometric machine, 
videography, etc.) 50,000 
 Total 9,95,000/ - 
 *Mastercrafts perons engaged in the programme preferably should 
be Shilp Guru/National Awardee/ National Merit Certificate 
Holder/State Awardee. If Shilp Guru/National Awardee/ National 
Merit Certificate Holder/State Awardee is not available in particular 
craft then the implementing agency shall approach Regional 
Director concerned and he / she would finalize the name by 
constituting a committee of AD(H) HM&SEC concerned. 
** In special cases, if the cost of per prototype is substantially 
higher than the provisioned amount, special permission shall be 
sought from the office of DC (H) and amounts shall be released 
based on the sanction.

238 • Assistance shall be in the form of 100% grantin -aid by O/o DC(H). 

(iii) Assistance to exporter and entrepreneur for design prototype: 

The objective of the programme is to promote the organizations in export of handicrafts for 
development of new and innovative items. The financial assistance is provided for development 
of design prototypes for exporters and entrepreneurs by selecting or involving reputed designers 
from India and abroad who will help in the development of a range of products suitable for 
particular markets. 

Duration and participation: Maximum duration of 6 months. 

Eligibility: 

• Entrepreneurs/ exporters/ association of exporters 

• Entrepreneurs/ exporters/ association of exporters can be assisted maximum once in a year. 

• Designers to be sourced through reputed institutions such as NID, NIFT, NCDPD and others. 

Financial assistance and funding pattern: 

• Financial assistance of upto 40% of the designer fee upto a maximum of INR 20,000/ - per 
month for six months. 

(iv) Commercial market intelligence by way of design, trend and technical colour forecast: 

The increasing need & requirement of the overseas buyers about the new designs & trends has 
led to the implementation of this scheme during the 12th Plan Period. The objective of the 
programme is to increase the knowledge of the entire handicrafts sector about the new design 
trends & color forecasts so as to increase the exports from the country by increasing the new 
design led product. Eligibility • The scheme would be implemented through NID, NIFT, EPCH, 
CEPC, NCDPD and other reputed design institutions. 

Financial assistance and funding pattern: 

• The assistance will be provided with a maximum grant of upto INR 10 lakh 

• The components are as follows: Cost of Designing & Artwork, Cost of printing of copies of 
trends book, Preparation of copies of CD with cover for the soft copy of the trends book and 
miscellaneous expenses etc. 

(A) (III) Human Resource Development

239 The Human Resource Development (HRD) Scheme has been formulated to provide qualified and 
trained workforce to the handicraft sector. This workforce shall contribute to a strong production 
base leading to production of high quality products that cater to present day market requirements. 
This scheme also aims to create human capital for the sector in terms of trained cadre of 
designers for the handicrafts by providing relevant inputs through its components. There is also a 
provision made for the imparting soft skill considered necessary for the artisans to enable them 
to undertake their own business successfully. 

The scheme has the following five components: 

1. Training through established institutions: 

The component aims at upgrading/imparting skills in different trade of Handicrafts in a 
continuous and sustainable manner by creating an institutional framework. This shall be 
achieved through regular training courses run by institutes as specified in the eligibility section. 
These programmes provide an opportunity for the artisans to upgrade their skills, interact with 
other craftsmen and at the same time creates livelihood opportunity for the masses by skilling 
them through training programmes in different crafts. 

Duration and participation: 

• Trainings of minimum 144 hrs and maximum 600 hrs duration will be imparted to each 
participant and the eligible institute will train a minimum 200 people in a year. • The training 
duration shall be between four weeks and four months. No course of duration less than four 
weeks will be admitted. In exceptional cases the maximum duration can be allowed to increase 
by 25 percent maximum with the approval of DC(H). • In a week maximum 6 days and in a 
month maximum 24 days will be considered as admissible for working out the financial 
assistance wherever financial assistance is indicated on per day basis. 

Eligibility: 

• Vocational training institutions, Industrial training Institutes (ITI), polytechnics, technical and 
other institutes recognized by central Government/concerned state Government/ universities and 
such other affiliating bodies. 

• Implementing agency should have sufficient infrastructure to run the 5 year Training 
Programme. • Other organizations which are imparting vocational trainings of Ministries of 
Central Government. • The Institutes should have • At least 3 years of experience in imparting 
vocational training and has trained at least 500 people. • Sufficient premises for imparting the 
training • Necessary power connection for operating machinery and tools • Necessary 
administrative/technical staff for maintenance of requisite records and imparting training • A 
systematic syllabus containing theory/ practical wherever applicable, should be submitted on 
(weekly/monthly basis).

240 Financial assistance and funding pattern: 

• The assistance shall be in the form of capital grant and training grant. Total cost for 5 years per 
Institute will be maximum Rs. 1.45 crore (capital grant and training grant combined together). • 
One time capital grant of Rs. 25 lakh will be provided for the plan period. This grant can be used 
for purchase of machineries, equipment, furniture and fixtures, computers and related hardware 
and software, books and periodicals etc. • Training grant of maximum of Rs. 95/ - per trainee per 
hour will be provided subject to a maximum of Rs. 24 lakh per year. 

• The assistance shall be in the form of 100% grant -in-aid by O/o DC(H) 

2. Handicrafts training program 

To increase production base by involving more and more persons in this sector, large number of 
training programmes in hard and soft skills are required to be undertaken to fill the gap of the 
skilled workforce. Two type of skill training programs will be held under this component: a) 
Technical trainings b) Soft skill training. 

Eligibility: 

• Vocational training institutions, Industrial training Institutes, polytechnics, technical and other 
institutes recognized by central Government/concerned state Government/ universities and such 
other affiliating bodies. • Other organizations which are imparting vocational trainings of 
Ministries of Central Government 

(a) Technical Training: Aims to train the persons in handicrafts and handmade carpets 
including pattern making, stencil making, talim writing, mould making etc. 

Duration and participation: 

• Training of minimum 144 hrs. and maximum 600 hrs. duration will be imparted to each 
participant. The training duration shall be between four weeks and four months. No course of 
duration less than four weeks will be admitted. In exceptional cases the maximum duration can 
be allowed to increase by 25 percent maximum with the approval of DC(H). • In a week 
maximum 6 days and in a month maximum 24 days will be considered as admissible for working 
out the financial assistance wherever financial assistance is indicated on per day basis. • Batch 
size of min 20 participants will be allowed. 

Financial assistance and funding pattern: 

• Assistance of maximum of Rs. 95/ - per trainee per hour .The assistance shall be in the form of 
100% grant -in-aid by O/o DC(H). 

b) Soft skill training:

241 Aims to train the persons in non-Technical skills such as micro finance/entrepreneurship 
development/ preparation of Business plans/preparation of project reports/ packaging/ export 
procedures/Documentation etc. so that to enable them in running their own enterprises smoothly. 

Duration and participation: 

• The program shall be for a period of minimum 2 days or 12 hours of training and maximum of 
12 days or 72 hours. • No course of duration less than two days will be admitted. • In exceptional 
cases the maximum duration can be allowed to increase by 25 percent maximum with the 
approval of DC(H). • Batch size of min 20 participants will be allowed Eligibility: 

• Central and State Handicrafts Corporations, other institutions and organizations under central 
and state governments, COHANDS, EPCH, CEPC, NCDPD, IICT, MHSC, CDI and Apex 
cooperative Societies. • NGOs (registered under society act/ trust act, etc.) having experience in 
vocational training of min 50 persons per year for at least three years either directly or through 
an institution run by the NGO. 

Financial assistance and funding pattern: 

• Assistance of maximum Rs. 140 per trainee per hour will be provided as these are highly 
specialized courses and technical experts from reputed institutions will be required to be 
involved. 

• The assistance shall be in the form of 100% grant -in-aid by O/o DC(H) 

3. Training through Guru Shishya Parampara 

This component provides for handing over/transfer of traditional knowledge from master 
craftsmen to the new generation ensuring the sustenance of the craft. New/Semi -skilled artisans 
are provided training by mastercrafts persons. 

These trainings will help add value to the quality of the outputs, help the artisans learn the 
finishing techniques and also give them the exposure to innovative techniques which can be 
achieved using improved tools and technology. The training will enable improved production as 
well as productivity and help artisans adapt to new design and techniques 

Duration and participation: 

• The program should be for a minimum period of 2 months and maximum 6 months. • Batch 
size of minimum 15 participants will be allowed. 

Eligibility:

242 • Shilp Guru Awardee, National Awardee, National Merit Certificate, State Awardee and other 
master crafts persons. 

Financial assistance and funding pattern: 

• The assistance shall be in the form of 100% grant -in-aid by O/o DC(H) • Maximum assistance 
of Rs. 10,000/ - per trainee per month will be provided. 

4. Training of the trainers 

It is a course for master craftsperson /trainers for refreshing and honing up their skills under 
which the master craftspersons /trainers are exposed to new designs, use of improved tools and 
new production techniques and technologies. The programme is organized to acquaint the 
trainers as well as other practicing master craftsmen with the latest developments that have been 
taking place in the field of design technology and production techniques. The programme would 
essentially address the issues like new design concepts, use of improved tools, new production 
techniques, new technologies, Production management and costing, Economic and commercial 
intelligence, Packaging etc. 

Duration and participation: 

• The program should be for duration of 4 -8 weeks with a batch size of 20 participants. In a week 
maximum 6 days and in a month maximum 24 days will be considered as admissible for working 
out the financial assistance wherever financial assistance is indicated on per day basis. • The 
course will be from 144 hours to 300 hours. No course of duration less than four weeks will be 
admitted. In exceptional cases the maximum duration in terms of months can be allowed to 
increase by 25 percent maximum with the approval of DC(H). 

Eligibility: 

• Vocational training institutions, Industrial training Institutes, polytechnics, technical and other 
institutes recognized by Central Government/concerned State Government/ universities and such 
other affiliating bodies. • Other organizations which are imparting vocational trainings of 
Ministries of Central Government • Central and State Handicrafts Corporations, other institutions 
and organizations under central and state governments, COHANDS, EPCH, CEPC, NCDPD, 
IICT, MHSC, CDI and Apex cooperative Societies. • NGOs (registered under society act/ trust 
act, etc.) having experience in vocational training of min 50 persons per year for at least three 
years either directly or through an institution run by the NGO 

Financial assistance and funding pattern: 

• Maximum assistance of Rs. 150 per trainee per hour will be provided.

243 • The assistance shall be in the form of 100% grant -in-aid by O/o DC(H). 

5. Design mentorship and apprentice program 

The component aims at providing mentorship and learning to final year/graduate/post graduate 
students from reputed design institutes, recognized schools of fine arts and other premiere design 
institutes recognized by AICTE / UGC / CSIR / Central/State Govt. and other such affiliating 
bodies. 

The component has the following objectives: • To provide new designs, technology & product 
development to the handicraft sector • To promote of dedicated cadre of designers and 
merchandisers for the handicraft sector • To provide regular design inputs to handicrafts clusters 
and exporting community • To update the sector about the changing global scenario with 
reference to innovative designs • To support product development and upgrade quality • 
Development & supply of market driven New / Innovative Design / Product lines • Transforming 
designs into products with the help of Sr. Designers / Merchandisers • To establish specific 
integrated design development approach • To fill up the gap in the areas of Design & Product 
Development - the biggest constraint in present handicraft sector • Adoption of new design, 
pattern and product development on the principle of Focused Products and Focused Markets. 

Eligibility: 

• NCDPD, CEPC, EPCH, IICT, MHSC, NIFT, NID and other reputed design institutes running 
at least a recognized degree and diploma course in designing for last three years. Duration and 
participation: • 6 months and 50 participants. 

Financial assistance: 

• The amount shall be reimbursed to respective institutions with the following caps per trainee 
enrolled: 
Sl.No Expense Head Maximum Permissible 
Assistance 
a) Designer Fee 
 2 International designer Rs. 60,000/ - per designer 
per month 
 4 Domestic designer Rs.30000/ - per designer 
per month 
b) Apprentice allowance Rs.5000/ -per participant 
per month 
c) Raw material Rs.2000/ -per participant 
d) Miscellaneous expenditure (stationery, 
telephone, refreshments, publicity, repair Rs.5000/ -per participant

244 of machinery, biometric machine, 
videography, etc.) 
e) Travel and logistics Rs.5000/ -per designer 
per month 
f) Institutional charges Rs.4000/ -per participant 

 
(A) (IV) DIRECT BENEFIT TO ARTISANS 

Under the Direct Benefit to the artisans, the following intervention will be carried out: 

(i) Rajiv Gandhi Shilpi Swasthya Bima Yojana (RGSSBY) 

Rajiv Gandhi Shilpi Swasthya Bima Yojana (RGSSBY) aims at financially enabling the artisans‟ 
community to access to the best of healthcare facilities in the country. 

Eligibility to get the coverage: 

All craft persons will be eligible to be covered under the Scheme. 
Pattern of Financial Assistance: 
GOI share = 75% of the total premium (90% in case of J&K and NER States) 

*State‟s share = 25% of the total premium (10% in case of J&K and NER States) 
Artisan‟s share = Rs.30/ - for registration 
*In case of non-consenting states, the State share will also be contributed by GOI 

(ii) Bima Yojana for Handicrafts Artisans (Aam Admi Bima Yojana (AABY) 

The objective of “ Aam Admi Bima Yojana (AABY) for Handicrafts Artisans” is to provide life 
insurance protection to the Handicrafts Artisans. All crafts persons will be eligible to be covered 
under the “AAB “Yojana for Handicrafts artisans subject to the conditions laid down by LIC 
from time to time. The present age between 18 -59 years living below & marginally above the 
poverty line were provided insurance cover in the erstwhile JBY as well as in the new AABY. 
Pattern of Financial Assistance 
GOI contribution Rs.290/ - 
Artisans‟ contribution Rs. 80/ - 
LIC‟s contribution Rs.100/ -

245 Total premium* Rs.470/ - 

 

(iii) Support to artisans in indigent circumstances 

During the 11th Plan period, this activity was perused as a separate non plan scheme. However 
during the deliberations of the Working Group on Handicrafts, it was decided that this being 
broadly a welfare measure, it should be included as a component under the Welfare plan scheme 
for 12th Plan. Accordingly, the existing non plan scheme shall be discontinued during the 12th 
Plan. 

This scheme is proposed to support the artisans during their old age. The scheme is designed to 
give a boost to the handicraft sector in India. 

Eligibility: 

• Master craftsperson who are the recipient of Shilp Guru Awards, National Awards or Merit 
Certificates or State Awards in Handicrafts will be eligible for being considered for financial 
assistance. • The annual income of the artisan will not be Rs 30,000/ - (Rs Thirty thousand only) 
or more. • The applicant should not be a recipient of similar financial assistance from any other 
source. • The artisan should not be less than 60 years of age on the date of application. Age may 
be relaxed in case of artisan with disabilities. 

Nature of assistance: 

Assistance from the government may be either in the form of monthly allowance or lumpsum 
grant or both. In no case however, shall the assistance exceed Rs. 3000/ - (Rupees Two three 
only) per month. 

(iv) Credit Guarantee Scheme: 

The component is envisaged to alleviate the problem of collateral security or 3rd party guarantee 
and remove impediments to flow of credit to handicrafts sector. 

Eligibility: 

The handicraft artisans/ producers groups/Self Help Groups who are engaged in manufacturing 
activities in Handicrafts Sector are covered under Credit Guarantee Scheme. 

Financial assistance : 

• This guarantee cover is extended to all the lending institutions (Member Lending Institutions) 
that are member of CGTMSE. • The composite all-in Guarantee Fee at specified rate of

246 CGTSME shall be paid by the O/o DC(H). This shall be calculated on the outstanding amount to 
the debit of the borrower‟s accounts. • The Scheme covers collateral free credit facility (term 
loan and working capital) extended by Eligible Lending Institutions to artisans/ manufacturers 
involved in manufacturing of Handicrafts upto INR 25 lakh per borrowing unit. The guarantee 
cover of the CGTMSE is available for eligible collateral free credit upto INR 25 lakh. • The rate 
of interest and the duration of the loan shall be as per the norms of lending banks i.e. the Member 
Lending Institutions of CGTMSE. • The coverage will be for three years. • Service charges @ 
5% of the total amount of guarantee fee/ annual service charge remitted by the agency/agencies 
every year to the CGTSME, or actual, whichever is lesser will be paid to partners who facilitate 
credit disbursal. 

(v) Interest Subvention Scheme: 

This component is being introduced for the first time based on suggestions emerged during the 
deliberations of the Working Group on Handicrafts. This scheme is facilitating credit access for 
handicrafts artisans, through introducing interest subventions for scheduled banks. 7% interest 
subvention, subject to actual , shall be available for artisans for loan taken from Scheduled 
banks. Maximum benefits of Rs. 1,00,000/ -for a period of 3 years is admissible. 

Eligibility: 

• Handicraft artisan registered with the office of DC (H) subject to the guidelines issued by DC 
(H) from time to time containing eligibility criteria, identified crafts and such other conditions as 
deemed fit. 

Financial assistance: 

• An interest subvention of 7% is approved for artisans under NHDP. 

(vi) Issue of Identity Cards and creation of data -base 

The identified artisans will be given Photo Identity card. Agencies having necessary 
infrastructure to undertake the work will be identified by this office. In addition, an aadhar linked 
data-base of artisans will be developed to enable better targeting and monitoring. Financial 
assistance • Assistance to the tune of INR 50/ - maximum per card and software and training for 
this work will be provided by this office. 

(vii) Financial Assistance for supply of tools, safety equipments, looms, furnace etc. 

This scheme has been proposed for continuation in the 12th Plan period. The objective of the 
scheme is to improve the productivity of the craftsmen and their income. Model toolkits, safety 
equipment, looms, furnace etc. may be approved at DC(H) office before distribution.

247 Financial assistance and funding pattern: 

• The assistance will be upto a maximum of INR 10,000 per artisan depending on the craft 
practiced. However in case of purchase of looms and furnaces etc. the financial ceiling will be 
Rs.20, 000/ - per unit including of required accessories. • Assistance shall be in the form of 100% 
grantin -aid by O/o DC(H). 

(viii) Shilp Guru Award, National Award & National Merit Certificate for outstanding 
contribution in Handicrafts Sector. 
The scheme is continued for implementation during the 12th Plan period with some 
modification. The objective of the scheme is to give recognition to outstanding craftspersons in 
the handicrafts sector. Under the scheme, Shilp Guru Awards, National Awards and National 
Merit Certificates will be awarded to a craftsperson only once in a lifetime to encourage master 
craftsperson‟s to maintain excellence in craftsmanship and keeping alive our old tradition. The 
component will be implemented by Hastkala Academy or departmentally. 

Eligibility • Outstanding craftsmen having vast experience in the handicraft sector 

Financial assistance and funding pattern • Gold Medal, INR 2 lakh and Tamra Patra for Shilp 
Guru • INR 1 lakh and Tamra Patra for National Awardee • INR 75,000 for merit certificates • In 
addition, Shilp Guru will create two replicas of the masterpiece for which award has been given. 
An assistance upto INR 2 lakhs will be given for the replica as 100% grant by the Office of DC 
(H) per Shilp Guru, subject to actuals. • INR 20,000 towards rail travel assistance for Shilp Guru 
and National Awardee. 

(A) (v) Infrastructure and Technology Support 

(i) Urban Haat 

The objective of this component is to setup a permanent marketing infrastructure in big towns/ 
metropolitan cities to provide direct marketing facilities to the handicrafts artisans/handloom 
weavers. This will enable them to sell their products round the year to a wider target audience (or 
customer segment). Another important feature of the Haat is that there will be adequate number 
of stalls selling authentic Indian cuisine of various regions in the country by rotation. The Food 
& Craft Bazaar will provide leisure & recreational facilities for domestic as well as international 
tourists on the lines of Dilli Haat, which has already attained a prominent status amongst 
important domestic & international buyers/ tourists. The haat shall be constructed in an area of 
not less than 8,000 sq. m. and will have a display gallery, food court etc. The stalls are allotted to 
artisans on rotational basis on a nominal rent. In addition, weavers can also participate in this 
scheme. . The implementing agencies will be encouraged to form SPVs with active participation 
of the various agencies dealing with promotion of Tourism, Culture, Food, Processing Industry, 
etc., involving the tour operators, hotel operators in addition to those dealing with handloom and

248 handicrafts for broad basing and ensure utilisation of facilities for long duration for management 
and day-to-day running of the same. The implementing agency will be required to sign 
Memorandum of understanding specifying quantified deliverables. 

Eligibility: The scheme will be implemented through State Handicrafts/Handlooms 
Development Corporations/Tourism Development Corporations/ Urban Local Bodies with 
sufficient financial resources and organizational capacity to implement the project. 

Financial assistance and funding pattern • The financial ceiling for urban haat is INR 300 lakh 
for each unit. • 80% of the admissible amount shall be borne by the O/o the DC(H) and 20% will 
be contributed by the implementing agency • Land will be provided by implementing agencies 
and will be over and above the 20 % contribution by the implementing agency. • Assistance will 
also be given for strengthening of existing urban haats subject to a maximum financial limit of 
Rs 1.50 cr. 100% Govt. Assistance. 

(ii) Mini Urban Haat 

The objective of this component is to setup a permanent marketing infrastructure in towns as 
well as on established tourist circuits in the form of way -side amenities to provide direct 
marketing facilities to the handicrafts artisans/handloom weavers to enable them to sell their 
products round the year and to a wider target audience (or customer segment). The mini urban 
haat will have at -least 10 stalls and an area of not less than 1000 sq mt. . The implementing 
agencies will be encouraged to form SPVs with active participation of the various agencies 
dealing with promotion of Tourism, Culture, Food, Processing Industry, etc., involving the tour 
operators, hotel operators in addition to those dealing with handloom and handicrafts for broad 
basing and ensure utilisation of facilities for long duration for management and day -to-day 
running of the same. At the time of scrutiny of the proposals, the implementing agency will be 
asked to submit the Detailed Project Report [DPR] containing such elements as management and 
maintenance scheme, source of funding, revenue model, etc. The implementing agency will be 
required to sign Memorandum of understanding specifying quantified deliverables. 

Eligibility: 

The agencies like Handicrafts/Handloom Development Corporations, Tourism Development 
Corporations, Panchayati Raj Institutions, Urban Local Bodies, etc., with sufficient financial 
resources and organizational capacity to implement such projects will be eligible for assistance 
under the scheme. The implementing agencies will be encouraged to form SPVs for management 
and day -to-day running of the same. At the time of scrutiny of the proposals, the implementing 
agency will be asked to submit the Detailed Project Report [DPR] containing such elements as 
management and maintenance scheme, source of funding, revenue model, etc.

249 Financial assistance and funding pattern: • The financial ceiling for the Mini Urban Haat is 
INR 200 lakh for each unit. • 80% of the admissible amount shall be borne by the O/o the DC 
(H) and 20% will be contributed by the implementing agency subject to the ceiling. • In case of 
NER, 90% of the admissible amount will be contributed by the O/o the DC (H) and 10% shall be 
borne by the implementing agency. • Land will be provided by implementing agencies and will 
be over and above the 20/10% contribution by the implementing agency. 

(iii) Emporia 

Under this component, assistance would be provided for the setting up of emporia. These would 
be setup in commercially viable locations in the implementing agencies‟ own/rented building. 

Eligibility: The agencies like Handicrafts/Handloom Development Corporations, Tourism 
Development Corporations, Central/State Institutions, Trade Promotion Bodies, Artisan 
Federations, Panchayati Raj Institutions, Urban Local Bodies, etc., with sufficient financial 
resources and organizational capacity to implement such projects will be eligible for assistance 
under the scheme. The implementing agency will give due recoginiton to Central Government 
contribution to the project in its premises. 

Financial assistance and funding pattern: 

• The financial ceiling for emporia is as mentioned below: 
Component Proposed per unit cost (INR lakh) 
New emporia, class A Town 50 
New emporia, class B Town 40 
New emporia in rented building 15 
• 50% of the admissible amount shall be borne by the O/o the DC (H) and 50% will be 
contributed by the implementing agency subject to the ceiling specified in above table. 

(iv) Marketing and Sourcing Hubs in Urban Areas 

(iv) (b) Marketing and Sourcing Hub in non-metros 

It is proposed to setup Sourcing Hubs in major craft clusters, towns and cities with the objective 
of providing a marketing platform for the buyers. This will enable them to source their 
requirements, round the year, from the producers from clusters in that area. At present there is no 
such platform and as a result on the one hand buyers are facing problem in sourcing their 
requirements for domestic and international markets whereas on the other hand the producers are 
not aware of the markets for their products. This facility will support in enhancing the production

250 and sales from the cluster and also aid in generating productive employment in the respective 
areas in and around such hubs. These hubs will be setup on PPP mode. 

Eligibility: The agencies like Handicrafts/Handloom Development Corporations, Tourism 
Development Corporations, Export Promotion Councils, Trade Promotion Bodies, Panchayati 
Raj Institutions, Urban Local Bodies, etc., with sufficient financial resources and organizational 
capacity to implement such projects will be eligible for assistance under the scheme. 

Financial assistance and funding pattern: • The financial ceiling for setting up a marketing 
hub in non-metro will be INR 500 lakh 

(v) Design and Craft Schools 

This component is being introduced to fill up the lacuna of absence of an organized formal 
institutional set up at any level in the country for imparting craft related skills. Office of DC (H) 
has taken an effort to strengthen institutional set up in each state throughout the country with the 
initiative of State. The schools would conduct education programs to offer professional design 
and craft instructions across a wide range of age groups, from traditional to contemporary and for 
various levels of skill and experience. The main objective of the school is to achieve all round 
development in the field of Handicrafts and to revive the Languishing crafts with the help of 
training and to provide maximum employment opportunities to the traditional and nontraditional 
craftsmen for the constant progress of the handicrafts. 

Eligibility: • Central/State corporations and Central /State level institutions. • Reputed Design 
Institutions • Panchayati Raj Institutions, Urban Local Bodies • SPV of Handicraft 
Entrepreneurs. 

Financial assistance and funding pattern : • The financial ceiling for the component shall be 
INR 250 lakh. • The financial assistance will be 100% from GOI to Central/State corporations 
and institutions • The financial assistance will be 50% from GOI to reputed design institutions 
and SPV of Handicraft Entrepreneurs. The remaining 50% contribution will be from the 
implementing agency. • Land or building for the school will be provided by the implementing 
agencies and will be over and above the 50% contribution by the implementing agency • The 
assistance would be available for cost of construction, Design Gallery, CAD centre, Plant and 
Machinery, Equipments and Tools, Furniture and fixtures, Display structure and Interior 
decoration. 

(vi) Handicrafts Museum 

The objective of the handicrafts museum is to establish a platform through which India‟s heritage 
traditional arts and craft can be popularized amongst artists, scholars, designers and the 
interested public. The primary objective of the Museum is to collect and preserve objects

251 exhibiting exquisiteness in craftsmanship and conceptual innovations in design or its functional 
aspects. 

Eligibility: The agencies like Handicrafts/Handloom Development Corporations, Tourism 
Development Corporations, Central/State Institutions, Trade Promotion Bodies, Artisan 
Federations, SPVs of handicraft entrepreneurs/exporters etc., with sufficient financial resources 
and organizational capacity to implement such projects will be eligible for assistance under the 
scheme. The implementing agency to give due recoginiton to Central Government contribution 
to the project in its premises. 

Financial assistance and funding pattern: • The funding shall on actual subject to a maximum 
of INR 100 lakh for each museum. • The amount shall be for setting up of new museum and also 
for up gradation of existing museum as per need assessment. • The financial assistance will be 
100% from GOI for Central/State corporations and institutions. • The financial assistance will be 
50% from GOI for reputed design institutions, artisans‟ federations and SPV of Handicraft 
Entrepreneurs. 

(vii) Design Banks 

The design bank is to be established with the objective of having a collection of designs in 
electronic form and these digitized designs should be made available to various users groups to 
enable them to diversify/innovate and also customize products according to the domestic / 
international market needs. These banks shall also provide details of availability of raw material, 
technology required, skilled human resource and cluster from where these innovative products 
can be sourced/ produced. 

Eligibility : 

The assistance would be provided to institutions like NIFT, NID, IICT, BCDI, MHSC, NCDPD, 
SIDC, the agencies like Handicrafts/Handloom Development Corporations, Tourism 
Development Corporations etc., with sufficient financial resources and organizational capacity to 
implement such projects will be eligible for assistance under the scheme. 

Funding pattern: • The financial ceiling for the total amount to be sanctioned for each Design 
Bank is INR 60 lakh. • The assistance will be in the form of 100% assistance from Office of DC 
(H). 

(viii) Craft Based Resource Center : 

The objective of this center is to create an institutional mechanism to provide a single window 
solution in an identified craft for comprehensive handholding in the following aspects: • 
Technical & Technological information • Marketing Intelligence • Enterprise Development •

252 Micro Finance Activity • Reporting/ Monitoring evaluation/ Experience share • Product 
Information • Raw material information • Cluster/ producer information. 

Eligibility: The partner can be a reputed NGO/ federation of artisans/Government corporations 
and autonomous bodies/Council/Apex bodies, an SPV promoted by banks,financial institutions 
and corporate bodies, universities. 

Financial assistance and funding pattern: 

• The ceiling for the total amount to be sanctioned for each resource center is INR 100 lakh. • 
The assistance will be in the form of 70% assistance from Office of DC (H) subject to the ceiling 
mentioned above and 30% will be contributed by the implementing agency. 

(ix) Common Facility Center 

The objective of the common facility center is to ensure economy of scale, price 
competitiveness, quality control, application of Design and Technology input on continuous 
basis, scope of product diversification and higher unit value realization and compliance with 
WTO compatible standards. Such a common facility will lead to significant reductions in the 
cost of production, production of a diversified range of high value products, sample 
development, reduction in the response times in order execution and ensure high quality of final 
products. 

Eligibility: • Reputed NGOs, Apex cooperative societies, Trusts. • COHANDS, EPCH, CEPC, 
MHSC, IICT, NCDPD, NIFT, NID, University Deptt., DRDA, NISIET, EDIs, • Central/ State 
Handloom and Handicrafts Development Corporations and other related Govt. Corporations/ 
agencies promoted by State Government or Financial Institutions. • Trade Promotion Bodies • 
Federation of artisans/ SHGs /SPVs promoted by entrepreneurs, Designers, Exporters. • 
Organizations registered under section 25 of Company act (Non profit), etc. • Organizations 
registered under statute of state/ central govt., for sustainable development of craft. • Trusts of 
Handicraft Artisans, • Panchayati Raj Institutions, Urban Local Bodies, etc. 

Funding pattern: 

• The financial ceiling for setting up a common facility center is INR 300 lakh. • The financial 
assistance by the Office of DC (H) shall be 70% subject to the ceiling specified above. In case of 
CFCs under AHVY, financial assistance will be 100%. • Assistance will also be available for 
upgradation/ strengthening of existing CFCs with a maximum of Rs 200 lakhs (70% of the total 
project cost) 

(x) Raw Material Depot

253 Aim of this component is to make easy availability of quality, certified and graded raw material 
to the artisans/entrepreneur at a reasonable rate. 

Eligibility: • Government autonomous bodies/Council/ Apex bodies, an SPV promoted by 
banks/ financial institutions and Corporate bodies, State Handloom & Handicraft Corporations / 
Exporter bodies/SPVs of Exporters/association of exporters, DRDAs, Urban Local Bodies,etc. 
registered under relevant acts, federation of artisans. • It is to be managed by the private sector in 
a partnership mode with Government (PPP). A core committee may be created for supervising 
and policy related matters. Core committee should consist of representatives of all the 
stakeholders. The committee will frame the modalities and ensure proper & bonafide rotation/ 
distribution of raw material, fair pricing etc. 

Financial assistance and funding pattern: • The financial ceiling for a raw material bank is 
INR 200 lakh, and out of this INR 50 lakh will be earmarked for setting up of godown. • In 
respect of State/Central Corporations and any government bodies, funding will be 100% by the 
GOI and other cases the funding will be on the pattern of 70% by GOI and 30% by implementing 
agency. 

(xi) Technology Upgradation 

Assistance to Exporters/ Entrepreneurs The objective is to extend the technological up gradation 
facility to exporters/entrepreneurs. The facility center should be an infrastructure with modern 
machinery including packaging machinery to support product, productivity, quality, etc. 

Eligibility : Exporters and Entrepreneurs. 

Financial assistance and funding pattern: • The maximum amount of funds to be sanctioned is 
INR 60 lakh for each facility center. • The financial pattern would be based on 30:70 sharing 
between the Government of India through the Office of the D.C (H) and the Exporters/ 
Entrepreneurs respectively. 

(xii) Testing Laboratories 

In order to standardize / certify raw materials/ products, it is proposed to • set up new labs, • 
Strengthen existing labs. The objective is to offer total Testing and Quality Assurance support 
for handicrafts 

Eligibility: • Exporter bodies, EPCH, CEPC, state corporations • CSIR and Textiles Committee 

Financial assistance and funding pattern: • The financial assistance would be in the form of 
Grant -in-aid with a ceiling of INR 100 lakh for each testing laboratory. • This grant would be in 
the form of 100% through the Office of the D.C (H) to the eligible institute/ organization.

254 (xiii) Crafts Village 

Craft village is a modern day concept wherein craft promotion and tourism are being taken up at 
single location. Artisans live and work at the same place and are also provided with the 
opportunity to sell their products thereby ensuring livelihood. Craft items are exhibited as well as 
sold here. The O/o DC (H) would provide assistance both towards improving infrastructure in 
existing villages where a substantial number of craftsmen practicing similar crafts are residing 
and also setting up of new villages where craftsperson can be rehabilitated. The aim would be to 
select villages that can be connected with some tourist circuit to ensure sale of products. Under 
this component office of DCH will fund improvements/creation of infrastructure which would 
include roads, sewerage, water, street lights, footpaths, housing cum workshed, shops and 
display areas. These will be undertaken by the implementing agency and the craftsmen will be 
rehabilitated with new worksheds and display areas. The display areas will be in form of stalls 
where the artisans can sell their product. Each project will be approved by a committee headed 
by the Secretary. 

Eligibility: State and central Government organization/ corporations/ state institutions/ Local 
government bodies, Panchayati Raj Institutions, Urban Local Bodies, SPVs of 
entrepreneurs/exporters, federation of artisans. 

Financial assistance and funding pattern: • The financial ceiling for the total amount 
sanctioned per unit will be INR 1000 lakh. • The funding pattern will be 70% by GOI and 30% 
by implementing agency and in case of government agencies 100% by GOI. • Land will be 
provided by implementing agency and it will be over and above its 30% contribution, attributed 
in the funding pattern. 

(xiv) Integrated Handicraft Park: 

The establishment of an Integrated Handicraft Park will provide a permanent platform for the 
bringing together of the urban populace and crafts communities. The purpose of setting up of 
Park is to setup an integrated facility which would facilitate the production, finishing, packaging 
and sale of craft articles. 

In the campus of the Handicraft Park, the following facilities shall be provided: • Training 
facilities • Work shed cum housing, • Dormitory for Ladies & Gents, • Raw material bank • 
Warehouse • Common Convention Centre, • Common facility centre • Guest House • Common 
effluent treatment facilities • Display areas/Shops/Showrooms • Other basic infrastructure 
facilities such as internal roads, electric supply, water supply, boundary wall etc 

Eligibility: Artisan federation/ SPVs promoted Exporters and entreprenuers/ Industry and trade 
promotion bodies/ Panchayati Raj Institutions, Urban Local Bodies, State and Central 
Government Corporations.

255 Financial assistance and funding pattern: • The financial ceiling for the total amount 
sanctioned per unit will be INR 2500 lakh. 

Area of Operation: All North Eastern States 

B. MEGA CLUTER 

Mega cluster approach is a Drive to scale up the infrastructural and production chain at 
Handicrafts clusters which have remained unorganized and have not kept pace with the 
modernization and development that have been taking place so far. Consequently, there has not 
been any addition of fresh impetus of development and optimum realization of output in the 
handicrafts sector, which is not only the backbone of long traditional heritage and cultural 
linkages. 

The prospect of this sector lies in infrastructural improvement, modernization of the tools, 
machinery, process and product diversification and creating strong brands. Innovative designs as 
well as technical know -how, furthered by brand building of the native products hold the key to 
creating a niche market for the products manufactured by the clusters. The proposed programme 
is expected to support the Up gradation of infrastructural facilities coupled with market linkages 
and product development & diversification. 

Handicrafts clusters are located in clearly identifiable geographical locations (clusters) that 
specialize in specific products, with close linkages and inter dependence amongst the key players 
in the cluster. 

Further, during implementation of the Mega Cluster projects it has been observed that in certain 
cases interventions are required to be implemented at various places throughout the country in a 
particular craft for generating employment through skill up -gradation and also for increasing the 
market base of the craft within the country as well as in the International market. In such cases 
the mega Cluster Scheme would be flexible to reach all corners of the country wherever the 
selected craft exists. The activities may vary from soft to hard interventions. In short, Mega 
Clusters can be implemented in a fixed geographical area as well as different places throughout 
the country in a particular craft or in a state where crafts are identified on block/cluster level. 

The Mega Clusters will be taken up for development through Handicrafts Mega Cluster Mission 
(HMCM) or through Central/State Corporations as and when announced in Union Budget or as 
per requirement and as per the DPR prepared for the purpose. 

The broad objectives of the proposed program are as follows: i. To enhance the competitiveness 
of selected clusters in terms of increased market share and ensuring increased productivity by 
higher unit value realization of the products. ii. To ensure effective integration of scattered 
artisans, building their grass roots enterprises and linking them to SMEs in the sector to build 
critical mass for customized interventions and ensure economies of scale in operations. This will

256 build a supply system that is geared to responding to large -scale orders, adhering to quality and 
product standardization, which are pre -requisites of global markets. iii. To generate additional 
livelihood opportunities to the people through specific intervention in segmental sub sector 
industry and increase the incomes to the artisans/ craftsmen already engaged in this sector. iv. To 
provide requisite support/ linkages in terms of adequate infrastructure, technology, product 
diversification, design development, raw material banks, marketing & promotion, social security 
and other components that are vital for sustainability of artisans/craftsmen engaged in the 
Handicrafts sector. v. The core elements of the strategy for the proposed program are given 
below: vi. Proactive and strong technical and program management assistance for capacity 
building, designing of the interventions and their implementation, through a competent 
professional agency. 

Funding pattern: 

Funds to the tune of 3% (max.) of project cost shall be earmarked for establishing baseline data / 
DPR against which performance can be compared at the end of the project. The total fund 
requirement will be as per the DPR. The maximum duration of the project will be four years. 
50% of the approved project cost will be released as advance. Second Installment @ 40% of the 
approved project cost will be released on utilization of 70% of 1st installment. The last 10% 
amount will be released as reimbursement on completion of project and submission of utilization 
report etc. 

Implementation Methodology & Framework: 

A project of this nature, which is need based, multi stakeholder driven, holistic and outcome 
oriented, would require institutional structure and processes that are capable and conducive to 
achieving the objectives of the program. The following will be the methodology and process 
through which the project would be implemented: - 

i. Undertaking a detailed diagnostic study of the cluster in order to identify the needs, gaps and 
also developing base line reference data. 

ii. Preparation of a Detailed Project Report (DPR) covering technical, financial, institutional and 
implementation aspects, based on the diagnostic study. This DPR would clearly establish the 
expected outcomes of each of the interventions, which are measurable. 

iii. Validation of the findings of the diagnostic study and the DPR by the key stakeholders of the 
cluster including representative associations, federations of the artisans, support institutions, 
service providers, State Government and Central Government agencies. 

iv. Approval of the DPR by PAMC under Ministry of Textiles. 

v. Procurement of land, wherever needed for any of the interventions of the DPR, by the SPV

257 vi. Implementation of the interventions as per the phasing mentioned in the DPR. 

vii. Monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of the interventions against the outcomes 
defined in the DPR. 

4 Marketing Support & Services 

The following interventions will be provided under marketing support: 

(i) Domestic Marketing events 

(i)(a) Assistance for organizing/participation in marketing events in India 

In order to promote and Market Handicrafts financial assistance will be provided to different 
eligible organizations to organize Craft Exhibitions in metropolitan cities/state capitals / places 
of tourist or commercial interest/ other places. This will provide direct marketing platform to the 
handicrafts artisans/SHGs/entrepreneurs from various parts of the country. 

(i)(a) (1)Gandhi Shilp Bazaar/Craft Bazars 

In order to promote and Market Handicrafts financial assistance will be provided to different 
eligible organizations to organize Gandhi Shilp Bazaars (GSB)/Crafts Bazar in metropolitan 
cities/state capitals / places of tourist or commercial interest/ other places. This will provide 
direct marketing platform to the handicrafts artisans/SHGs/entrepreneurs from various parts of 
the country. 

Gandhi Shilp Bazaars will be organized based on roster to be prepared considering important 
fairs/festivals/prominent cities/ historical places/places of tourist interest etc. These bazaars will 
be organized at -least once a year on the same location at a fixed time. This will enable people of 
that area to source their requirement through these Bazaar organized and at the same time will 
create a brand for such events in line with Surajkund Mela. Further Shilp bazaars will also be 
organized at other locations, which will be occasion specific/ theme specific Craft Bazaars even 
if not featuring in the roaster if a situation so arises like in case of major National/ international 
events or other events which are important but not held annually. 

Duration and participation: • Duration of 7-10 days and shall accommodate 60-100 stalls. 

Eligibility: • The eligible organization includes Central and State Handicrafts Corporations, 
other institutions and organizations under central and state governments, COHANDS/EPCH/ 
CEPC/IICT/MHSC /NCDPD, Apex cooperative Societies and National level Apex Societies 
(registered under society act/ trust act, etc.) and National level Apex Societies (registered under 
society act/ trust act, etc.) Societies and NGOs (registered under society act/ trust act, etc.)

258 Financial assistance and funding pattern: • The financial ceiling for GSB and Craft bazars is 
based on classification of towns: o Class I (cities with population above 5,000,000): INR 20 
Lakh o Class II (cities with population between 5,000,000 and 1,000,000): INR 18 Lakh o Class 
III (cities with population less than 1000000): INR 16.00 Lakh. 

• In case of GSB, 100% funds shall be in the form of grant -in-aid and will be sanctioned by the 
Office of the Development Commissioner (Handicrafts) to the eligible organizations. • In case of 
Craft Bazaars 

• The financial assistance to the extent of 75% of the approved cost (subject to a ceiling specified 
in table above) will be considered and balance 25% will have to be borne by the eligible 
organization. The same will apply to Craft Bazaars being organized in North -East. 

• In case of Craft Bazaars being organized outside NER, 90% of approved cost shall be provided 
as assistance and 10% shall be contributed by the organization subject to condition of 100% 
participation of artisans of NER with a provision of relaxation upto 20% in deserving cases by 
DC (H) only if sufficient number of artisans from the North -East are not available. 

• Bazaars with less than 60 participants or if organized for less than 7 days will not be admissible 

• The stalls will be provided free of charge to the artisans and organizations are free to raise their 
contribution through gate money/ publicity/food stalls etc. 

• The maximum permissible assistance will not exceed Rs 1800/ - per participant per day in class - 
I city, Rs 1600/ - per participant per day for class -II city, and Rs 1400/ - per participant per day in 
class -III city. 

• In case of craft bazars the permissible assistance will be reduce to 75% of the limit indicated 
above depending on the class of cities. 

(i)(a) (2)Exhibitions 

Organizing large events with 100 artisans in a cities requires lot of capacity both financially and 
logistically on the part of an organization and in the handicrafts sector which is fragmented and 
rural in nature finding agency with such large reach among the artisans is not so easy. Therefore 
it is proposed to provide financial assistance for smaller marketing events at local level to 
provide marketing opportunity to group of artisans from the area. This will enable continuous 
availability of marketing platform to the artisans/entrepreneaurs/ SHGs without the limitation of 
logistics and increase the penetration of the crafts to all parts of the country. 

Duration and participation: • The exhibitions shall be organized for a period of 7 -10 days with 
participation from minimum of 10 and maximum of 50 artisans

259 Eligibility: • The eligible organization includes Central and State Handicrafts Corporations, 
other institutions and organizations under central and state governments, COHANDS, 
EPCH,CEPC, NCDPD, Apex cooperative Societies and National level Apex Societies 
(registered under society act/ trust act, etc.) and National level Apex Societies (registered under 
society act/ trust act, etc.) Societies and NGOs (registered under society act/ trust act, etc.) 

Financial assistance and funding pattern: 

• The financial ceiling for exhibitions will be based on classification of towns: o Class I (cities 
with population above 5,000,000): INR 9 Lakh o Class II (cities with population between 
5,000,000 and 1,000,000): INR 8 Lakh o Class III (cities with population less than 1,000,000): 
INR 7 Lakh 

(i)(a) (3) Hiring of built up space in events organized by other organizations 

To enable the artisans to display and sell their products in established fair organized by 
Department of Tourism or State and Central Governments and other organizations ., an enabling 
provision is made for acquiring stalls in fairs for allotment to the artisans. 

Duration and participation: • The participation in an event will be for a minimum of 2 days or the 
duration of the event whichever is higher. • The number of stalls hired will not exceed 25% of 
the total stalls erected in the fair subject to maximum of 100 stalls. Eligibility: • Departmental 
activity Financial assistance and funding pattern • The admissible limits for participation are as 
follows: 

 
Expense head (for 100 stalls) Maximum permissible 
assistance (INR) 
Hiring of stalls (@ 2,000 per stall per day) 500,000 
Publicity 150,000 
TA (@ 2000 per participant) * 2,00,000 
DA @ Rs. 100/- 50,000 
Freight (@ 1000/ - per person) 1,00,000 
Misc. including stationery, telephone, 
refreshments, videography, documentation 
charges, biometric machine, etc 50,000 
TOTAL 10,50,000 
* In case of artisans from North East TA is proposed to be increased to Rs. 3,000/ - per artisans. 

(i)(a) (4) National Handicrafts Fair

260 The event will showcase the best of the Indian handicrafts in quality, design and versatility from 
across the country. The objective of this new programme is to organize an exclusive fair for 
handicraft products in India at a grand scale to increase visibility of the products in domestic 
market. The program will also benefit entrepreneurs who are unable to participate in the 
International fairs due to the high cost. 

Duration and participation : • 100-300 including artisans/ exporters/ 
merchandiser/manufacturer may participate in the event, for a period of 10-15 days. 

Eligibility: 

• The eligible organizations include Central and State Handicrafts Corporations, COHANDS, 
EPCH, CEPC, NCDPD, TPOs, other institutions and organizations under central and state 
governments, Apex cooperative Societies and National level Apex Societies (registered under 
society act/ trust act, etc.) and National level Apex Societies (registered under society act/ trust 
act, etc.) Societies. 

Financial assistance and funding pattern: • The funding shall be provided to the extent of 
INR 1.00 Crore maximum for organizing the event. 

(i) (b) Craft Awareness Programme 

The component aims to support local level awareness programs that target general public and 
spread awareness about our crafts. Such programs may be taken up at schools or other places 
where reach to wider audience can be ensured. 

Duration and participation: • Program duration should be maximum of 3 days 

Financial assistance and funding pattern: • The funding shall be provided to the extent of INR 
2.00 lakh which includes expenditure towards space rent, infrastructure and services (water, 
electricity etc.), Boarding and Lodging, TA, Freight, Insurance and miscellaneous etc. 

(i) (c) Demonstration programme 

The objective is to provide to organize small scale interaction programs to promote handicrafts 
with the general public. 

Duration and participation: • The event will be organized for maximum of 7 days with 
participation of artisans as per requirement. 

Financial assistance and funding pattern: • The funding for the component may be availed in 
isolation or in combination with another promotional activity. • The funding shall be provided to 
the extent of INR 4.5 lakh which includes expenditure towards space rent, infrastructure and

261 services (water, electricity etc), Boarding and Lodging, TA, Freight, Insurance and 
miscellaneous etc 

(ii) Assistance for organizing/ participation in marketing events abroad 
(ii)(a)Participation in international fairs and exhibition abroad 
With a view to promote exports of handicrafts and carpets the financial assistance will be 
provided to eligible organizations for participation in international fairs and exhibitions held in 
India and abroad. 
Duration and participation: • Participation will be for the duration of the event. 

Financial assistance and funding pattern: • The financial capping for the component shall be 
INR 50 lakhs. • TA/DA of one officers as per Rules, boarding and lodging, to & fro air fare and 
air freight of exhibits only for participants as indicated below, space rent, infrastructure, 
publicity/ directory entry/interpreters and other administrative expenditure for participation in 
international fairs. 

(ii)(b)Folk Craft Festival of India/ Stand Alone Shows/ road shows 

The folk craft festival of India/road shows / catalogue shows/thematic exhibitions/stand alone 
shows/ special events/ programmes shall be organized in India and abroad to create promote the 
products and create a brand image for Indian handicrafts in international markets. 

Duration and participation: • Maximum of 20 participants for the duration of the event. • The 
participants include artisans, SHG, entrepreneurs and exporters. 

Financial assistance and funding pattern : • The funding shall be on actual subject to a 
maximum of INR 60 lakhs per event • The funding will be in the form of 100% grantin -aid from 
O/o DC(H) 

(ii) (c) Market studies abroad 

The market is a dynamic in nature and changes frequently in terms of potentiality, taste, fashion 
and consumer preference. In order to remain competitive, it is necessary to gather above 
marketing intelligence through market surveys/ studies regularly. This helps in capturing 
business in virgin & emerging markets besides strengthening our hold in the existing markets 
through better knowledge of market demand trends and product preferences besides knowledge 
about techniques, processes and materials/other inputs being used by the competing countries. 

Funding pattern: • The financial assistance is considered for TA/ DA (upto 5 persons), their 
boarding/ lodging, local conveyance, desk research/ collection of sample in India & abroad, 
procurement of product catalogue, tools and implements, technology, documentation/ report

262 writing, Misc etc • The assistance will be in the form of 100% grant -in-aid from O/o DC(H) 
subject to a ceiling of INR 20 lakh per study. 

(ii) (d) International craft exposure programme 

This component has three sub-components, with details as follows: 

• Long and short term trainings cum exposure programs of Artisans/Mastercraftspersons/ 
designers/ technologists abroad on subject of designs, product innovations, techniques, 
technology, processing, finishing etc. 

• Financial assistance for Craftpersons/ designers/technologist from abroad to visit India & Vice - 
a-Versa for (a) studying designs and products and for creating awareness on design and product 
requirements of international market, and (b) for dissemination of information on latest 
production techniques, tools, equipments and technology being adopted by different countries 

Duration and participation: Maximum of 10 participants for a period up to maximum of 1 
month 

Funding pattern & mode of payment: • Financial assistance will be permissible towards 
airfare in economy class, DA as per Rules, local hospitality, boarding and lodging, local 
conveyance, space rent, related infrastructure and services, institutional/consultant fee, 
development of prototype, documentation charges, TA and wage compensation for trainees in 
India, raw material compensation and Misc, etc as per need on actual basis. • The eligible 
agencies shall receive 100% grant -in-aid from O/o DC(H) subject to a maximum of 30 Lakhs 

(ii) (e) Cultural Exchange Programme 

Under this activity, of master craftpersons will be deputed under a Cultural Exchange 
Programme for live demonstrations of the craft he/she practices. The participation in Cultural 
Exchange Programme is arranged as per agreed terms social factors in exports including hiring 
of experts and consultants • Any other measures including welfare measures as well as deputing 
delegations of members and officers to resolve labour related or other social problems being 
faced in export of Handicrafts. 

Financial assistance and funding pattern: • Maximum provision of Rs. 1.00 cr per 
organization/per activity. • Assistance is based on actual need and requirement and is considered 
on merit of the proposal. • Grant -in-Aid will be 100% in case of Export Promotion Councils. In 
case of individuals, the expenditure will be shared between GOI and individuals in the ratio of 
70:30.

263 (iii)(a) Buyer seller meet in India 

The objective of this event is to provide linkages to local artisans to showcase their products to 
the major buyers of India ensuring integrated and inclusive development of the Indian 
handicrafts. 

Duration and participation: • The meet will be organized for up to 3 days with participation 
upto 50 buyers and 50 artisans Eligibility: • Central and State Handicrafts Corporations, 
COHANDS, EPCH, CEPC, NCDPD, TPOs, other institutions and organizations under central 
and state governments, and Apex cooperative Societies • NGOs (registered under society act/ 
trust act, etc.) and federation of SHG‟s 

Financial assistance and funding pattern: • Financial assistance to the tune of INR 15 Lakh 
will be permissible towards buyer seller meet. • The financial assistance to the extent of 80% of 
the approved cost (subject to a ceiling specified in table above) will be contributed by O/o 
DC(H) and balance 20% will borne by the eligible organization. • In case of NER, 90% of 
approved cost shall be provided as assistance and 10% shall be contributed by the organization. • 
In case of Departmental Activity, 100% funding by Government. 

(iii)(b) Buyers sellers meet abroad and reverse buyer seller meet in India 

Since small exporting units cannot afford to participate in International Fairs organized in India 
& abroad on their own, it is proposed to fund the umbrella organizations mentioned in the 
eligibility clause for organizing International Handicrafts Trade Fair/buyers sellers -meets in 
India and abroad. To monitor the impact assessment of such participations, one Officer of the 
Office of DC (Handicrafts) can also be deputed to the programme. 

Duration of event: • The meet will be organized for up to 3-5 days 

Financial Assistance and funding pattern: • The funding shall on actual subject to a maximum 
INR 50.00 Lakh • The financial assistance will be permissible towards space rent, interiors, TA, 
Publicity, Boarding and Lodging, Documentation and miscellaneous. • The financial assistance 
to the extent of 100% of the approved cost (subject to a ceiling specified above) will be 
considered. 

(iv) Marketing workshops 

Marketing workshops will be organized at National/State/Local level departmentally to discuss 
various problems faced in handicrafts sector with artisans and experts in relevant fields like 
designer, technologist, exporters, buyers and financial institution etc. 

Duration and participation: • The workshops will be held for a minimum of 2 days.

264 Eligibility: • Departmental Activity 

Financial assistance and funding pattern: 

• The financial parameters for such workshop will be as under: Event Minimum Number. of 
participants maximum permissible assistance (INR) 
Event Minimum Number of 
participants Maximum permissible 
assistance (INR) 
National level marketing 
Workshop 200 20,00,000 
Regional Level Workshop 100 8,00,000 
State level marketing 
workshop 80 5,00,000 
Local level marketing 
workshop 40 2,00,000 

 
(v) Workshops/ seminars/ symposiums/ programmes organized abroad 

This component with the following objectives: • Awareness creation among foreign designers/ 
technologists, buyers, media persons, opinion makers as well as general public • Interaction with 
Govt. officials, trade representatives and buyers for topics like improvements in the products, 
policies and designs 

Financial assistance and funding pattern: • The financial assistance will be permissible for 
resource person fee, to and fro Air-fare/ DA for one coordinator, Venue charges, Local 
conveyance TA/DA for local resource person , publicity, invitation, sound system, refreshment, 
lunch, to and fro freighting and packing/unpacking of goods, tools, insurance, etc. • The financial 
assistance will be on actual basis subject to max of INR 50 lakhs. 

(vi) Rental for warehousing 

This component aims are providing financial support for renting warehouses abroad. 

Financial assistance and funding pattern : • 80% of the rental cost towards hiring of 
warehouses abroad to store handicraft products shall be reimbursed subject to the maximum of 
Rs.25.00 lakh per unit. 

(vii) Publicity and Brand Promotion 

(vii)(a) Publicity via print and electronic media

265 Publicity and Brand promotion shall help highlight Indian handicraft products as quality products 
and thus boost sales in India and abroad. 

Further brand promotion shall also be targeted through the same component. Under this 
programme comprehensive designing of large scale media campaign will be carried out to 
promote the brand. The campaign shall involve both digital (television, online and audio) and 
physical (press, billboard, in -store and street) advertising. It shall be floated across various 
locations within and outside India; Advertising of the brand at international and national fairs 
and events shall be carried out adopting a brand centric approach and build on the same to 
increase sales of handicrafts by increasing brand recall. 

Financial assistance will be considered to the eligible organizations for publicity for the 
following activities: 

• Large scale campaign to promote Handicrafts and the brand in lines of „Incredible India‟ • 
production of video films on various theme • general advertisement and publicity in print and 
electronic media • Special supplements in print and electronic media in connection with events 
like National Award etc. • bringing out posters/hoardings/ other advertisement panels on 
handicrafts • official newsletters/ directory/souvenirs/ calendars for publicity • printing of hand 
book of scheme/procedures of the Office of DC (Handicrafts) • Printing of yearly reports 
required under GFR to be placed before the Ministry/ Parliament etc. • purchase of books/ 
periodicals/ journals for the departmental library • Subscription for news papers/Magazines etc. • 
hoarding at strategic locations in the cities • blow -ups banners • bus back panels • 
kiosks/Railway/State transport advt panels and other such methods • publicity through IT related 
medium like dedicated web sites • catalogues shows on the internet and fashion show • publicity 
banners on the home pages of web sites • making of CD -ROMs for various marketing events and 
launching of the same on Internet for enlightening/ awareness of the customers about the venue, 
name of artisans and their artifacts for direct sales • printing of books/manuals/crafts 
directories/languishing crafts • audio visual publicity by screening of films on handicrafts at 
places like airport lounges, Doordarshan/other private channels and screening of these films in 
various departmental Crafts Bazaars/ Melas like Dilli Haat, Surajkund etc. • printing of publicity 
and propaganda material for incoming/ outgoing exhibitions to be mounted as per Cultural 
Exchange Programmes and other events on recommendation of Indian Embassies • 
printing/publication of brochures/catalogues/ folders/ state maps on handicrafts as part of the 
marketing mix and to supplement the marketing efforts of Central/State Corporations and Apex 
Bodies as per the prescribed guidelines • creating a brand image through hiring brand 
ambassadors • Organising cultural events through hiring off/ tie -up with reputed designers and 
organizing shows for the products • Design of Logo to represent „Handicraft brand‟ • Any other 
activity considered relevant for the purpose. 

Financial assistance and funding pattern: • The financial assistance of maximum INR 2.00 
crore per activity shall be provided under this component will be 100% Grant -in-Aid for eligible

266 organization. In case that the office of DC (H) undertake the activity departmentally there will be 
no limit on the expenditure. 

(vii) (b) Web Marketing 

The objective of the sub-component is to support advertisements and other publicity activities on 
the web media and also creation of e-marketing platform. 

Financial assistance and funding pattern: • The funding for the component may be availed in 
isolation or in combination with another promotional activity. 

 
For detail Information visit: http: http://handicrafts.nic.in/pdf/Scheme.pdf#page=139

267 Ministry of Tourism 
19.1 Name of Scheme: Entrepreneurship Programme 

As part of the Suo -Motu initiatives of the Ministry of Tourism under the Scheme of “Capacity 
Building for Service Providers”, it has been decided to provide financial assistance to Govt. 
sponsored Tourism & Hospitality Institutes, Kerala Institute of Tourism & Travel Studies 
(KITTS) and India Tourism Development Corporation (ITDC) to conduct entrepreneurship 
development programmes to be called Entrepreneurship Programme. 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 

Year of Commencement: 2018 

Salient features : 

To begin with, courses will be offered in the following five trades : - i) Cook – Tandoor ii) 
Barman iii) Baker iv) Homestay (Multi -Skilled Caretaker) v) Halwai – Indian Sweets. 

Each course will also have a built -in emphasis on improving the trainees in hygiene, sanitation, 
behavior and attitudes in order to enhance their market acceptability. 
The Programme will be implemented through the Institutes of Hotel Management, Food Craft 
Institutes sponsored by the Ministry of Tourism, Kerala Institute of Tourism & Travel Studies 
(KITTS) and India Tourism Development Corporation (ITDC) or any other agency specifically 
nominated by the Ministry of Tourism. 

A class will have a minimum of 10 trainees and a maximum of 30. However, the programme will 
have an inclusive nature. In case the number of eligible candidates exceeds the requirement of a 
batch and there is a requirement of additional batches, the Implementing Agency will 
concurrently or in phases run more batches depending on its institutional capacity. In case of 
phasing, the scheduling of candidates between batches will be on first -cum-first-admitted basis. 
The Implementing Agency will maintain a register of applications which will also indicate the 
date of receipt of each. 

APPLICATION FEES : The fees chargeable to the applicant/eventual trainee would be Rs.100/ - 
for general candidates, 50% fee (i.e. Rs.50/ -) from women and Physically handicapped and no 
fees from the SC/ST candidates. 

STIPEND : A trainee with a minimum attendance of 80% will be paid a uniform lump -sum 
stipend of Rs.1,000/ - in respect of all the seven courses. This amount would be payable in two 
equal instalments. The first instalment would be paid after completion of 75 hours of training and

268 the balance paid only after the certified trainee submits his/her feedback on the quality of the 
course and his/her self-employment status to the Implementing Agency. 

Funding Pattern : 

The Programme will be funded under the MoT‟s Scheme of Capacity Building for Service 
Providers under Suo Motu Initiatives. The detailed Type -wise breakup of costs for the courses 
for Baker, Halwai (Indian Sweets), Cook (Tandoor), Homestay (Multi -Skilled Caretaker) & 
Barman would be as follows :- 
Sl. No. Component Cost 
(Rs.) 
1. Training fee (i/c Material Cost + Trainer Cost) 5,000/ - 
2. Course Material (Handouts) 500/- 
3. Certification fee (Certificate + Evaluation 
charges) 1,000/ - 
4. Apron 300/- 
5. Lunch (@ Rs.100 for 30 days) 3,000/ - 
6. Stipend 1,000/ - 
7. Total 10,800/ - 
8. Administrative expenses 5% (of Sl. No.07) 540/- 
9. GRAND TOTAL : 11,340/ - 

 
Over and above the costs listed above, Advertisements in the local papers will be reimbursed on 
actual basis subject to lowest/DAVP rates and Boarding & Lodging Costs at the rate of Rs. 
2000/ - per trainee in respect of all outstation candidates for the entire duration of the course. 

Eligibility : To target those who are 8th (Eight) Class pass and above the age of 18 years. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: 
http://tourism.gov.in/sites/default/files/guideline/INTRODUCTION%20OF%20EP%20 - 
%20GUIDELINES%20%282%29.pdf

269 19.2 Name of Scheme: “Adopt a Heritage” „Apni Dharohar, Apni Pehchaan‟ 

The Ministry of Tourism in close collaboration with the Ministry of Culture, Archeological 
Survey of India (ASI), State/ UT Governments and the Private/ Public sector companies/ Trusts/ 
NGOs/ Individuals, etc. envisages developing amenities at heritage sites, monuments and tourist 
sites to make them tourist - friendly and increase the site‟s tourism potential by enhancing the 
tourist experience in a planned and phased manner. 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 

Year of Commencement: 2020 

Objectives: Developing basic tourism infrastructure in and around heritage sites, 
monuments and tourist sites. 

• Develop facilities and amenities to improve the tourist experience at heritage sites, 
monuments and tourist sites. 

• Promote cultural and heritage value of the country and develop avenues to create 
awareness about the heritage sites/tourist sites in the country 
• Develop and promote sustainable tourism infrastructure and ensure 
proper Operations and Maintenance therein. 
• Develop employment opportunities and support livelihoods of local 
communities at the heritage and tourist sites. 

Salient features : 

To tap the true potential of these monuments and sites, it is necessary to provide basic facilities 
and amenities including safety and security, to facilitate tourists, and allow their adaptive reuse 
to provide new experiences through illumination, night viewing facilities etc. At the same time, 
it is to be ensured that these interventions are within permissible guidelines of the Nodal 
Department i.e. ASI, State Tourism Department, State Archaeology & Museums Department, 
Forest Department etc. 

To achieve the above, the project envisages handing over of 
development/construction/upgradation of facilities and amenities along with their complete 
operation and maintenance (O&M) for the heritage sites/ monuments/ tourist sites etc. to private 
and public sector companies/ trusts/ individuals/NGOs etc. who would be known as “Monument 
Mitras” for their initiative. This handover shall be initially for a period of 5 years subject to

270 review at any time, regular monitoring and feedback mechanism from all the stakeholders 
including tourists. 

At present many heritage/natural/tourist site and monuments lack basic tourist amenities and 
facilities. The heritage/natural/tourist sites and monuments shall be provided with basic and 
advanced amenities as per the tourists‟ requirements ensuring world -class facilities. The tourist 
amenities have been divided into two categories as per the project guidelines: 

Basic Amenities 

Basic amenities are an important aspect in tourism as they can augment the popularity of the 
place; and facilitate repeated visits and mouth to mouth publicity as a promotional tool. Basic 
amenities at any tourist place are first and foremost right of the tourist as every single visit to the 
monument gives impetus to the local economy. Basic amenities are important irrespective of 
their financial feasibility in project structuring. The indicative list of basic amenities within and 
surrounding areas are as below: 

• Public conveniences (Toilet Facilities) 

• Drinking water facilities/ water kiosk 

• Ease of Access/ Barrier Free Monuments/ Accessibility for All: differently abled 
friendly toilets, ramps, wheelchair facility, braille signages, monument models 

• Cleanliness of site/ Swachh Monument (Cleanliness of the monument, 
including complete polythene ban) 
• Illumination (interior & exterior) 

• Signage (Information and Directional Signages) 

• Benches 

• Dustbins 

• Wi-Fi 

• App based Multilingual Audio -Guide 

• Point of Sale Terminal (PoS) machines at the Ticketing Counters to promote cashless 
transactions 

5.2 Advanced Amenities

271 Advanced amenities shall be planned as per the identified monument‟s tourist footfall and 
financial feasibility of proposed interventions. The indicative list of Advanced Amenities : 

• Snack Counter (Ready to Eat Snacks & Drinks) 

• Basic souvenir shop promoting local art and craftsmanship 

• Facilitation of n i gh t v i s i t s to m o n u me n t s u n d e r a d ap t i ve us e w i t h i n 
permissible guidelines of the nodal department (ASI, State Government etc. heritage 
byelaws) 

• Advanced surveillance system (Like PTZ based CCTV cameras) 

• Tourist Facilitation cum Interpretation Centre (Tourist Multi -Purpose Centre) with 
facilities like museum, shopping/souvenir shop, cloakroom, toilet, drinking water, 
money exchange etc. 

• Technology based interpretation techniques (Augment Reality, Virtual Reality etc.) 

• Digital Interactive Kiosk, Digital (LED) screening 

• Light and Sound Shows 

• Cultural shows 

• Battery -operated vehicles/Golf Carts 

• Advanced tourist flow management system linked with carrying capacity of the 
monuments 

Area of Operation: All North Eastern States 

 

For detail Information visit: https://tourism.gov.in/sites/default/files/2020 - 
08/adopt%20a%20Heritage%20Project%20Guidelines.pdf

272 Ministry of Tribal Affairs 

20.1 Name of Scheme: Scheme of Strengthening Education among Scheduled Tribe (ST) 
Girls in Low Literacy Districts 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 

Objectives of the scheme: 

The scheme aims to bridge the gap in literacy levels between the general female population and 
tribal women, through facilitating 100% enrolment of tribal girls in the identified Districts or 
Blocks, more particularly in naxal affected areas and in areas inhabited by Primitive Tribal 
Groups (PTGs), and reducing drop-outs at the elementary level by creating the required 
ambience for education. Improvement of the literacy rate of tribal girls is essential to enable 
them to participate effectively in and benefit from, socio -economic development. 

Structure of Scheme: 

In order to intervene in a focused manner to improve literacy among tribal girls, and to bridge the 
gap between tribal female literacy and general female literacy levels and tribal female & tribal 
male literacy levels, following interventions/actions shall be taken: 

a) Providing hostel facilities for tribal girls at the Block level to enable them to attend regular 
middle/secondary school, and at the panchayat level to attend regular primary school. 

b) Hostel facilities only, and not schools, can be set up in a phased manner if needed, for up to 
100 primary school girls, and 150 middle and high school girls at the panchayat and block levels 
respectively. In compelling circumstances, the number to be accommodated can go up. The 
hostels may be at one or more location(s) but may not be spaced at a distance of more than 0.5 
kms in hill areas and 2 kms in the plains, from the regular school which they will attend. 

c) In exceptional cases, where the regular schools run under Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan or other 
schemes of Education Department are not available within 5 Km radius, schooling facility along 
with hostels may also be considered. 

d) Wherever Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalayas are operating, no hostels under the scheme 
would be opened within a distance of 5 Km. 

e) The educational complexes already established under the pre -revised scheme falling in the 
newly identified 54 low literacy districts of the revised scheme or in tribal blocks fulfilling the 
criteria as mentioned under the head „Coverage‟, and in the Primitive Tribal Group areas, will be 
continued unaffected.

273 f) The accommodation can be in hired premises or in the implementing agency‟s own building. 
No funds will be provided for construction of buildings. In case of own buildings, only 
maintenance grant for the building will be considered @ 30% of the notional annual rent, as per 
Public Works Department assessment. 

g) Cash stipend will be provided at the rate of Rs.100/ - per month for primary level girl students 
and Rs.200/ - per month for middle/secondary level girl students for coaching/special tuitions. 
h) Cash incentives will be given at the rate of Rs.100/ - per month at primary level (up to class V) 
and Rs.200/ - per month at middle and secondary levels (classes VI to XII) to meet their day to 
day requirement. 

i) Scheduled tribe girl students will be additionally motivated, by giving them periodical awards 
like bicycles, watches, etc. as would be decided by the Ministry, on passing Class VIII, X and 
XII. 

j) Primers will be prepared in at least 5 major tribal languages selected in coordination with the 
Ministry of Human Resource Development, for use of children up to Class III. 
k) A Mothers‟ Committee will be constituted by every fundee organization by involving 
representative (s) of each village (s), to which the inmates belong, that will meet once a month to 
supervise the running of the scheme and to suggest improvements. A register of the decisions in 
each meeting will be kept by the fundee institution. 

l) A District Education Support Agency (DESA), which would be a reputed Non Governmental 
Organization or a federation of Non -Governmental Organizations, will be established by every 
State Government/Union Territory Administration in each of the 54 identified low literacy 
districts that will: (Details provided in link below) 

(i) Promote 100% enrollment of scheduled tribe girls in the identified districts, blocks or pockets 
(for Primitive Tribal Groups), vis -à-vis present level of enrollment, class -wise, for all schools 
taken together. 

(ii) Reduce dropouts at the primary and middle school levels. 

(iii) Monitor the running of the hostels/complexes. 

(iv) Make payments, grant of awards, etc., as may be prescribed by the Ministry. 

(v) Arrange regular interaction between girls and ANMs to promote preventive health education 
and establish curative linkages of these hostels/complexes with health institutions. 

(vi) Promote awareness among parents towards the importance of girls‟ education.

274 (vii) Tie up with potential recruiters so that immediately on passing, the student can get a job or 
can go in for self-employment. 

m) The Ministry may support any reputed and experienced organization for training of District 
Education Support Agency/Non -Governmental Organizations/autonomous societies for running 
the project successfully. 

n) Ministry would support any innovative intervention by any organization including District 
Education Support Agency in these low literacy areas to promote scheduled tribe female literacy. 
Maximum 1% of the annual budget can be spent for this purpose. 

Funding Pattern 

100% Central Sector Gender specific Scheme . 
Eligibility: 
The scheme will be implemented through Voluntary Organizations (VOs)/Non Governmental 
Organizations (NGOs) and autonomous society/institutions of State Government/Union Territory 
Administration. 

Area of Operation 

The scheme will be implemented in 54 identified Districts (Appendix -I in link provided below) 
where the ST population is 25% or more, and ST female literacy rate below 35%, or its fractions, 
as per 2001 census. 

Any other tribal block in a district, other than aforesaid 54 identified districts, which has 
scheduled tribe population 25% or above, and tribal female literacy rate below 35% or its 
fractions, as per 2001 census, shall also be covered (Appendix -II in link provided below, Blocks 
intimated by West Bengal and Karnataka so far. Such Blocks fulfilling the criteria in other States 
may also be considered as and when reported). 

In addition, the scheme will also cover areas below a Block level (e.g. Gram Panchayats) 
inhabited by the notified Primitive Tribal Groups (PTGs) (Appendix -III). Out of all the aforesaid 
areas, the naxal affected areas shall be given priority 

 
For detail Information visit: https:// www.tribal.nic.in/writereaddata/Schemes/4 - 
6NGOSchemeStrengthningEducation.pdf

275 20.2 Name of Scheme: Scheme of Grant -In-Aid to Voluntary Organisations Working For 
the Welfare of Scheduled Tribes 
Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 

Objectives of the scheme: 

The prime objective of the scheme is to enhance the reach of welfare schemes of Government 
and fill the gaps in service deficient tribal areas, in the sectors such as education, health, drinking 
water, agro-horticultural productivity, social security etc. through the efforts of voluntary 
organizations, and to provide an environment for socioeconomic upliftment and overall 
development of the Scheduled Tribes (STs). Any other innovative activity having direct impact 
on the socio -economic development or livelihood generation of STs may also be considered 
through voluntary efforts. 

Salient features: 

Indicative categories of projects for which grants -in-aid may be considered under the scheme 
(There is no upper limit of the beneficiaries in each category of project and it will depend on the 
demand duly recommended by the State Committee subject to availability of funds. The number 
of beneficiaries shown in financial norms is only for the calculation purpose.) 

I. Education: 

1. Running/maintenance of Hostels in rented/owned buildings 

2. Running/maintenance of Non-residential School in rented/owned buildings 

3. Running/maintenance of Residential school (only where regular schools are not available) 
including schools for orphans in rented/owned buildings 

4. Sponsoring of 15 Tribal Girls from each of the North Eastern States viz. Assam, Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Manipur, Nagaland, Tripura, Arunachal Pradesh, Sikkim, and from Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep in Banasthali Vidyapeeth, Banasthali, Rajasthan or any such 
reputed organization 

5. Running/maintenance of rural night school for tribal adult education in rented/owned 
buildings 

6. Training in agriculture and allied subjects 

7. Running/maintenance of Library in rented/owned buildings

276 II. Health, sanitation and malnutrition 

8. Running/maintenance of 10 (ten) or more bedded hospitals (in multiple of ten)/dispensaries in 
rented/owned buildings 

9. Mobile Dispensary; Multi -service mobile units 

10. Preventive health and sanitation programme 

11. Drinking water programme 

III. Employment and Livelihood related projects 

12. Running/maintenance of Computer Training Centre (30 Trainees) as far as possible to be 
accredited by DOEACC of Ministry of Information & Technology or any other organization that 
may be indicated by the Ministry from time to time. 

13. Running/maintenance of training centers for employable skills (40-80 trainees) in 
rented/owned buildings 

IV. Other projects 

14. Running/maintenance of balwadi/crèche centers (25 children at each centre) in rented/owned 
buildings 

15. Running/maintenance of old-age homes for tribals in rented/owned buildings 

16. Mobile Library -cum-Audio Visual Unit for awareness towards education, genetic diseases 
and AIDs etc. 

17. Involving school children in spreading awareness of entitlements under Government 
programmes in low literacy pockets; promoting preventive health & sanitation; agro -horticultural 
productivity, soil and water conservation etc. 

18. Any other innovative project for development of education, health, livelihood, income 
generation etc. which is not covered under any scheme of this Ministry. 

Funding Pattern 

(a) The extent of assistance under the scheme would be 100% for those projects being 
implemented in the Scheduled Areas. 

(b) For those projects being operated in areas other than Scheduled Areas, 90% of the total 
project cost will be funded by the Government and the rest 10% will be borne by the concerned 
Organization(s).

277 (c) The Ministry shall, however, have the discretion to decide on 100% assistance depending on 
the merits of individual case, in areas other than the Scheduled Areas. 

(d) In such ongoing cases where the financial assistance to a particular VO/NGO is already 
100%, and for which the decision had been taken at appropriate levels, the support will continue 
at the same level i.e. 100%. 

(e) The extent of financial assistance to a VO/NGO for a particular category of project shall be 
limited to the financial norms prescribed for that category of project by the Government and 
revised from time to time. 

(f) The grant shall be sanctioned as per the procedure laid down under Rule 209 of General 
Financial Rules, 2005 as amended from time to time. 

Eligibility: 

a) Any registered voluntary organization (VO) / non -governmental organization (NGO) engaged 
in the conduct and promotion of social welfare of STs. The organization should have been 
registered for at least three years. 

b) Institutions or organizations set up by Government as autonomous bodies either under a 
statute or as a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860. 

c) A Public Trust registered under any law for the time being in force. The trust must have been 
registered for at least three years. 

Area of Operation 

All States and Union Territories 

 

For detail Information visit: https://tribal.nic.in/writereaddata/Schemes/NGO - 
GIAtoVOsGuidelines.pdf

278 20.3 Name of Scheme: Vocational Training in Tribal Areas 
Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Objectives of the scheme: 

Scheduled Tribes are the most marginalized section of the society, therefore to assist their socio - 
economic development; there is an imperative need to provide more employment avenues and 
income generation opportunities. It is aimed at upgrading the skills of the tribal youths in various 
traditional/modern vocations depending upon their educational qualification, present economic 
trends and the market potential, which would enable them to gain suitable employment or enable 
them to become self employed. 

Salient features: 

a) The scheme will be implemented for the benefit of the Scheduled Tribes as well as PTGs and 
can be taken up anywhere in the country but priority will be given to remote tribal areas, areas 
inhabited by particularly vulnerable tribes and areas affected by extremist activities. 

b) Under the scheme, the training for trades including modern trades having employment 
potential in the region should be provided. 

c) This scheme is exclusively for the benefit of scheduled tribes as well as PTGs. The 
organization running VTC will admit the ST youth irrespective of the region/State to which they 
belong. 

d) It will be imperative on the part of the concerned organization (i.e. States/UTs/NGOs/other 
organizations) to assess the employment potential in a particular area in advance depending on 
the educational qualification of the target population, type of industries available in that 
region/State, present economic trend and market potential, etc. before proposing the trades. 

e) The organizations will establish linkages with recognized institutions which can provide a 
Certificate/Diploma to the candidates for the trades in which they have been trained. 

f) The institutions/organizations (State/UT run institutions as well as NGOs) who are already 
running project with the assistance from this Ministry, and also the new applicant 
institutions/organizations should get/have recognition/affiliation/accreditation under “Modular 
Employable Skills (MES)” from Regional Directorate of Apprenticeship Training of the 
State/UT Governments or recognition/affiliation under “Craftsmen Training Scheme (CTS)” 
from National Council of Vocational Training (NCVT) under Directorate General of 
Employment & Training (Ministry of Labour & Employment, Government of India), as 
applicable.

279 g) The organization should establish linkages with placement services, and for the candidates 
interested in self employment after availing the training, the organization shall arrange easy 
micro finance/loans for them through financial institutions, National Scheduled Tribe Finance 
Development Corporation (NSTFDC), banks, etc. Preference will be given to those institutions 
which guarantee placement/employment after completion of training. 

h) As far as possible, minimum 33% seats will be reserved for tribal girl candidates. 

Funding Pattern 

i) 100% grant -in-aid will be provided to the States/UTs/State owned 
institutions/VOs/NGOs/other private organizations, eligible for assistance as specified in Para 2 
of the Scheme. (Details provided in link below) 

j) The grant -in-aid will be released to the State/UT Governments/State owned institutions in one 
installment in a year, and to the NGOs/private institutions in two installments as per General 
Financial Rules. 

Eligibility: 

Under the scheme of Vocational Training, grants will be available for organizing vocational 
trainings in recognized institutes or in Vocational Training Centers (VTCs) subject to terms and 
conditions revised from time to time of the scheme. 

2.2 The agencies eligible for such grants are: 

(i) State Governments and UT Administrations; 

(ii) Institutions or Organisations set up by Government as autonomous bodies, either under a 
statue, or as a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860; 

(iii) Educational and other institutions of the likes of local bodies and cooperative bodies. 

(iv) A Public Trust registered under any law for the time being in force. The trust must have been 
registered for at least three years. 

(v) Any Private Recognized Institution, registered and conducting such vocational courses for at 
least three years. 

(vi) Any industry or an association of industries like ASSOCHAM, CII, FICCI, etc. who are 
willing to run such skill upgradation training centers as per the financial norms of the scheme 
with a proper plan for placements. 

(vii) Voluntary Organization (VO)/Non -Government Organisations (NGOs)

280 Area of Operation 

All States and Union Territories but priority will be given to remote tribal areas, areas inhabited 
by particularly vulnerable tribes and areas affected by extremist activities. 

 
For detail Information visit: 
https:// www.tribal.nic.in/writereaddata/Schemes/VTCGuidelines.pdf 

 
20.4 Name of Scheme: Special Central Assistance (SCA) to Tribal Sub Scheme (TSS) 

The Scheme 'Special Central Assistance (SCA) to Tribal Sub•Scheme (TSS)', which is part of the 
Umbrella Scheme for Development of Scheduled Tribes, is directed towards providing grants to 
States/UTs as an additive to their own efforts for accelerating tribal development and 
strengthening institutional arrangements. 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2017 -18 
Objectives: 
The basic objective of the scheme 'SCA to TSS' is to support the efforts of the State Government 
in bridging gap between Scheduled Tribe (ST) population and other social groups through: 
(i) Human resource development by enhancing access to education and health services, 

(ii) Enhanced quality of life by providing basic amenities in tribal areas/localities for 
communities by interventions in the area of safe drinking water & sanitation, electrification, last 
mile road and communication connectivity, market development, transportation etc., wherever 
deficiency cannot be covered through other schemes of the Government of India /State. 

(iii) Enhanced capacity to avail opportunities for livelihood through skill upgradation (subject to 
NSQF compliance), financial inclusion and entrepreneurship development, access to 
entitlements/ rights/ service delivery, improved facilities at par with other areas, 

(iv) Alleviation of poverty and unemployment through measures like increasing farmers' income, 
income generating opportunities (Farm/Non -Farm), value chain development including food 
processing and creation of infrastructure/ assets incidental thereto. 

Salient features :

281 Allocation of funds among States under the Scheme shall be made keeping in view proportion of 
ST population in the State. tribal area, past performance and vulnerability/need. 

Allocation will be made in two phases; in the first phase 75% or the total budget allocation will 
be made and in the second phase remaining 25% of the budget will be allocated. 

Prioritization of activities: 

• Filling gaps in various sectors of development including Education, Health, Drinking 
Water, Electrification, last mile road and communication connectivity, Financial 
inclusion, Agriculture, Horticulture, Animal Husbandry (AH), Fisheries, Dairy & others 
in Primary Sector, income generating schemes to augment Tribal household economy, 
etc. Identification of gaps shall be the responsibility of the State Government. 
• Proposals from State Government may include initiatives towards qualitative 
improvement of existing Ashram Schools and hostels, expenses or existing Vocational 
Training Centres (subject to NSQF compliance) and Educational Complexes. 
• Proposals targeting women beneficiaries will be accorded priority. State Governments 
shall ensure that overall at least 33% beneficiaries arc women. 

Funding Pattern : 100% Grant by Government of India. 

Area of Operation: States having notified STs are eligible to receive grants under this 
Programme. 

 
For detail Information visit: https://tribal.nic.in/DivisionsFiles/sg/GuidelinesofSCA - 
TSS17092019.pdf

282 Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation 

21.1 Name of Scheme: Flood Management Programme 

In view of the demand by States for completion of ongoing and new critical works of flood 
management, the XII Plan Working Group on „Flood Management and Region Specific Issues‟ 
set up by the Planning Commission recommended continuation of Flood Management 
Progamme during XII Plan. 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 

Year of Commencement: 2013 

Salient features: 

Under “Flood Management Programme”, critical flood control, river management and anti -sea 
erosion works in the entire country would be covered. These works would include the works 
related to river management, flood control, anti -erosion, drainage development, flood proofing, 
flood prone area development programme in critical regions, restoration of flood control/ 
management works damaged due to force majeure like conditions, anti-sea erosion and 
catchment area treatment. The spillover of works approved under Flood Management 
Programme during XI Plan would also be supported under this scheme during XII Plan. The 
Central Assistance for spillover works shall be released on receipt of the request / proposals from 
the State Governments and completion of all formalities. 

The central assistance for projects of catchment area treatment will be provided only to such 
projects which meet the objective of flood management in selected / prioritized catchments 
having high rate of run -off / erosion ensuring convergence with similar projects of catchment 
area treatment/watershed management under MoEF, MNREGA of NoRD and DoLR etc. This 
will be of promotional nature on selective basis. 

Under the scheme, central assistance to the States would be provided for taking up flood 
management works in an integrated manner covering entire river / tributary or a major segment. 
In case of emergent situation arising due to high floods, the works in critical reaches would be 
taken up immediately after flood season. 

Funding Pattern: 

Special Category States: (The Special Category States covers the North Eastern States, Sikkim, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir and Uttarakhand.) 90% (Centre share): 10% (State share).

283 Other States: 75% (Centre share): 25% (State share). 

Central Assistance to all the States would also be provided for restoration of damaged flood 
management works with a funding pattern of 90% (Centre Share): 10% (State share). Central 
Assistance will not be provided for regular maintenance of flood management works but only for 
restoration of damaged works to complete them before next monsoon season provided such 
works were earlier constructed with central assistance and not covered under CRF/ NCCF. 

The State Governments shall ensure inclusion of the scheme in the State Plan and make requisite 
budget provision towards Central as well as State share on annual basis. 

The State Governments which adopt Flood Plain Zoning Bill (circulated by Central Water 
Commission in 2000) early would be given priority over the other States. 

Eligibility: 

The scheme would be implemented generally by Flood Control/Water Resources / Irrigation / 
Public Works Departments of the State Governments. In exceptional and emergent cases, the 
works could be entrusted to the central government organizations /undertakings, with the 
approval of Union Minister for Water Resources. 

Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: http://jalshakti -dowr.gov.in/sites/default/files/Guidelines -FMP - 
XI%20Plan%20 -Aug-2009.pdf

284 Ministry of Women and Child Development 

22.1 Name of Scheme: Working Women Hostel 

With the progressive change in the socio -economic fabric of the country more and more women 
are leaving their homes in search of employment in big cities as well as urban and rural 
industrial clusters. One of the main difficulties faced by such women is lack of safe and 
conveniently located accommodation. The Government of India being concerned about the 
difficulties faced by such working women, introduced a scheme in 1972 -73 of grant -in- aid 
for construction of new/ expansion of existing buildings for providing hostel facilities to 
working women in cities, smaller towns and also in rural areas where employment 
opportunities for women exist. Based on an evaluation, the existing scheme has been 
revised to promote availability of safe and conveniently located accommodation for working 
women who need to live away from their families due to professional commitments. 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 1972 -73 
Objectives: 
The objective of the scheme is to promote availability of safe and conveniently located 
accommodation for working women, with day care facility for their children, wherever 
possible, in urban, semi urban, or even rural areas where employment opportunity for women 
exist . The scheme is assisting projects for construction of new hostel buildings, expansion of 
existing hostel buildings and hostel buildings in rented premises . The working women‟s hostel 
projects being assisted under this scheme shall be made available to all working women 
without any distinction with respect to caste, religion, marital status etc., subject to norms 
prescribed under the scheme. While the projects assisted under this scheme are meant for 
working women, women under training for job may also be accommodated in such hostels 
subject to the condition that taken together, such trainees should not occupy more than 30% 
of the total capacity the hostel and they may be accommodated in the hostels only when 
adequate numbers of working women are not available. Children of working women, up to 
the age of 18 years for girls and up to the age of 5 years for boys may be accommodated in 
such hostels with their mothers. 

Salient features : 

Income Limit, Rent and Period of Stay

285 Working Women are entitled to hostel facilities provided their gross income does not exceed 
Rs. 50,000/ - consolidated (gross) per month in metropolitan cities, or Rs 35,000/ - consolidated 
(gross) per month, in any other place. When the income of any working woman already 
residing in a hostel exceeds the prescribed limits, she will be required to vacate the hostel 
within a period of six months of crossing the income ceiling. 

The implementing organisation charges from the inmates of the working women‟s hostel 
reasonable rent not exceeding 15% of their total emoluments/ gross salary in the case of single 
bed rooms, 10% in case of the double bed rooms and 7 ½ % in the case of the dormitories. 
Fees charged from the children in the Day Care Centre should not be more than 5% of the 
emoluments of their mother, or the actual expenditure whichever is less. The rent for women 
under training for job shall not exceed the rent to be charged from the working women. The 
rent for such trainees may be charged from the institution/ organization sponsoring the training 
or from the woman herself. The rent does not include use of the mess and other facilities like 
washing machines for which user charges should be collected. 

As far as practicable, women with children are accommodated in single/ double bed rooms 
instead of dormitory. 

No working woman is allowed to stay in a hostel, assisted under this scheme for more than 
three years. In exceptional circumstances, the District Administration may, for reasons to 
be recorded in writing, allow working women to stay in a hostel, beyond the three year 
period, subject to the condition that the period of extension, shall not exceed six months at one 
time, and that the total stay of the woman, with extensions, shall not exceed five years. 

Following categories of working women and their children are being covered under this 
Scheme: 
(i) Working women, who may be single, widowed, divorced, separated, married but whose 
husband or immediate family does not reside in the same city/area. Particular preference 
may be given to women from disadvantaged sections of the society. There should be also 
provision for reservation of seats for physically challenged beneficiaries. 

(ii) Women who are under training for job provided the total training period does not exceed 
one year. This is only on the c o n d i t i o n that there is vacancy available after 
accommodating working women. The number of women under training for job should not 
exceed 30% of the total capacity. 

(iii) Girls up to the age of 18 years and boys up to the age of 5 years, accompanying 
working mothers will be provided accommodation, with their mothers. Working mothers 
may also avail of the services of the Day Care Centre, as provided under the scheme.

286 Eligibility : 

The following agencies/ organisations can apply assistance under the scheme: 

(i) State Government agencies including Women Development Corporations, 
Women Finance Corporations etc. 

(ii) Urban Municipal Bodies including Cantonment Boards 

(iii) Panchayati Raj Institutions 

(iv) SHGs (Self Help Groups) 

(v) Recognized Colleges/ Universities 

(vi) Civil Society Organisations having proven track record of working in the fields of 
women's welfare/ social welfare/ women's education subject to the condition that such 
organization is registered under the Indian Societies Registration Act, 1860 or any relevant 
State Act; Public Trusts registered under any law for the time being in force, and Co - 
operative institutions meeting the following criteria: 

(a) It should be either recognized by the State/ UT administration under any existing 
scheme/law or should be well known with the experience of working in the field 
for at least 3 years, and its work should be reported to be satisfactory by the 
State Government/ Union Territory Administration concerned, 

(b) It should have a properly constituted Managing Body with its powers, duties 
and responsibilities clearly defined and laid down, 

(c) It should ordinarily have been engaged in the field of women's welfare/ social 
welfare/ women's education for a minimum period of three years prior to the 
request for grant - in-aid under the scheme, 

(d) Its financial position should be sound and it should have facilities, resources, 
personnel and experience to undertake the management of such a project, 

(e) It should run the hostel and the Day -care Centre for pre -school children on a no - 
profit basis. 

(vii) Corporate or associations like CII, ASSOCHAM, FICCI etc., subject to the condition 
that the other working women are also provided accommodation in the hostel under 
this scheme in addition to their female employees.

287 (viii) Ministry of Women and Child Development and the State Governments may construct 
hostels on their own, and lease them to organization(s) having experience for such 
period(s) as deemed sufficient, for managing its operations as per norms of the 
scheme. State Govt. may seek assistance as per the prescribed norms of the scheme. 

Funding Pattern : 

This scheme will be implemented as a Centrally Sponsored Scheme through States and share of 
Centre, State and Implementing Agencies will be in the ratio of 60:15:25 except in case of North 
Eastern and Himalayan State, where the share of Centre, State and Implementing Agencies will 
be in the ratio of 65:10:25. In the case of UTs, the share of Centre and Implementing 
Agencies will be in the ratio of 75:25. The Central Share will be approximately Rs. 225 crore for 
the year 2017 -18, 2018 -19 and 2019 -20. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

 

For detail Information visit: 
https://wcd.nic.in/sites/default/files/Working%20Women%20Hostel_about_revised_about.pdf 

 

 

22.2 Name of Scheme: Support to Training and Employment Programme for Women 
(STEP) 
Government of India has set an ambitious plan training 500 million individuals by 2022 which 
translates to training 42 million a year. For this purpose, India‟s vocational training 
infrastructure needs to be expanded to meet the diverse and many skill requirements of the 
population. There has been recent concern about the decline in women‟s workforce 
participation in India. Simultaneously, women have become more aspirational and are ready to 
contribute equally to the economy. 
MWCD, through its STEP Programme, has been addressing special situation of poor women 
and women in remote areas who are not in a position to move out of their immediate 
surroundings and go to a formal skill centre to acquire training. 
Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 1986 -87 
Objectives of the scheme:

288 The scheme has 2 fold objectives viz. 

a. To provide skills that give employability to women. 

b. To provide competencies and skills that enable women to become self- 
employed/entrepreneurs. 
Salient features: 
(a) Assistance under the STEP Scheme will be available in any sector for imparting 
skills related to employability and entrepreneurship as identified by the Ministry of Skill 
Development & Entrepreneurship (MSDE) including but not limited to the following: 
• Agriculture 
• Horticulture 
• Food Processing 
• Handlooms 
• Traditional crafts like Embroidery, Zari etc. 
• Handicrafts 
• Gems & Jewellery 
• Travel & Tourism, Hospitality 
In case any other specific course is conducted in any trade which is not included in the list 
given in Schedule II of MSDE‟s notification dated 08.08.2015 and amendments thereto 
(attached below), consultation with the industry and thereafter approval of Common 
Norms Committee will be required for giving approval to it. 
(b) Soft skills (which would include computer literacy, language and workplace inter- 
personal skills relevant for the sector/trade) would be an integral part of the skills training 
process and must be suitably integrated into the course modules. 
(c) All Skill Development courses offered under the scheme framework must conform to the 
National Skill Qualification Framework (NSQF) notified on 27.12.2013(attached below). 
Government funding would not be available for any training or educational programme/course 
if it is not NSQF compliant. 
Structure of Scheme: 

Number of Beneficiaries:

289 Approval would be given only for such number as are considered viable and the maximum 
number of beneficiaries in a project shall not exceed 200. 
Training will be imparted in batches with number that are manageable, within the infrastructure 
and training capacity of the organization and in groups that can be imparted due attention by 
the instructors. For trades that use equipment/ small machines/ computers, the batches will 
typically be determined by the number of such equipment that is available. 
Course Duration & Training Hours: 

Skill development will be domain specific demand led skill training activity leading to 
employment or any outcome oriented activity that enables a participant to acquire a skill 
duly assessed and certified by an independent third party agency, and which enables her to get 
wage/self -employment leading to increased earnings, and/ or improved working conditions, 
such as getting formal certification for hitherto informal skills. The project in any case must 
ensure a training input spread over 200 hours in a 3 month programme and 400 hours in a 6 
months programme (including practical and/or on the job training). 
Funding Norms for Assistance: 

The financial assistance under STEP will be provided on the basis of MSDE‟s Gazette 
Common Norms notification dated 08.08.2015 and clarifications/amendments thereto issued 
from time to time. 
Some of the features are as under: 

I. Base Cost: Base cost for different sectors will be as under w.e.f. 01.04.2016 :- 

(i) Rs.40.50/ - per hour of training for trades/sectors listed in Category I given at 
Annexure -I of the notification. (Details provided in link below). 
(ii) Rs. 34.70/ - per hour of training trades/sectors listed in Category II given at 
Annexure -I of the notification. 
(iii) Rs.28.90/ - per hour of training trades/sectors listed in Category III given at 
Annexure -I of the notification. 
* (The hourly rates shall be inclusive of cost components such as Mobilization of candidates, 
Post- placement tracking/monitoring, Curriculum, Placement expenses, Trainers‟ training, 
Equipment, Amortization of infrastructure costs/ utilities, Teaching aid, Raw material, 
Salary of trainers) 
II. Transport Cost: For candidates from Specials Areas undergoing training outside such Special 
Areas, to and fro transport cost as per actuals, subject to a maximum of Rs. 5000/ -per trainee, 
may be payable.

290 For : a) Residential trainings, and/or 

b) In respect of all skill development training programmes where trainees from Special 
Areas (as defined in MSDE‟s notification dated 08.08.2015) are trained outside these 
Special Areas, and/or 
c) Training programmes anywhere in the country where women trainees have to travel 
more than 80km from their homes to reach the nearest training centre and who are availing of 
boarding and lodging arrangements made for them. 
Ministries will reimburse Boarding & Lodging Costs up to a maximum per trainee per day as per 
table below: 

1. X Category Cities/Town per day per Trainee Rs. 300/- 

2. 
Y Category Cities/Town per day per Trainee 
Rs. 250/- 

3. 
Z Category Cities/Towns per day per Trainee 
Rs. 200/- 

4. 
Rural Areas and any Area not notified as a municipal/town area. 
Rs. 175/- 

III. Third Party Certification & Assessment Costs: To ensure independent and unbiased 
assessment and certification of trained candidates, costs for certification and assessment shall 
be payable to an independent third party including a University/Institute authorized for 
conducting assessments and certifications as per the rate as decided by MWCD within the 
range prescribed by MSDE. The independent third party agency should be NSQF 
approved independent third party agency. 
IV. Additional Support for Special Areas: Over and above the Base Cost, an additional 
amount equal to 10% of the Base Cost will be permitted for Skill Development programmes 
conducted in the North Eastern States, Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Lakshadweep and Districts affected by Left Wing Extremism 
(LWE) as identified by the M/o Home Affairs for the Integrated Action Plan (hereinafter 
referred to as „‟Special Areas‟‟). 
V. Reimbursement of Conveyance Cost: Upon successful completion of non -residential skill 
training programmes, and after certification, candidates of will be reimbursed the cost incurred 
in travelling to and from the training centres at the following rates: - 

Reimbursement of Conveyance per month :

291 
Training Centre within District of domicile 
- 
Rs.1000/ - 

Training Centre outside District of domicile 
- 
Rs.1500/ - 

VI. Post Placement Support: In order to enable the newly skilled persons to settle into their 
jobs/vocations under wage employment, post placement support will be provided to candidates 
of special areas/groups directly at the rate of Rs. 1500/ - per month for the following 
durations: - 

Placement within District of domicile 2 months 

Placement outside District of domicile 
3 months 

Provided the placement is made within three months of certification and after post validation of 
placement of the candidate. 
VII. Training for Persons with Disability (PwD): Over and above the Base Cost, an additional 
amount equal to 10% of the Base Cost will be provided for skill development programmes 
imparted to Persons with Disability (PwD). Provided that in the case of training of PwD in the 
Special Areas, the total cost permissible will be 120% of the Base Cost. At least 3% of total 
training done in each year shall be reserved for persons with disabilities, in trades as decided 
by the Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities, Ministry of Social Justice & 
Empowerment in conjunction with the NSDA. 
Funding Pattern: 

Under the STEP scheme, financial assistance to meet a maximum of 90% of the project 
cost will be sanctioned by the Government of India. The remaining 10% will have to be 
borne by the implementing agency from its own resources. 
Eligibility: 
The scheme is intended to benefit women who are in the age group of 16 years and above. 

Grants -in-aid under the STEP programme may be given to an institution having a distinct legal 
entity as under: 
(a) Institutions or organizations set up as Autonomous Organization under a specific 
statute or as a Society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 or Indian Trusts 
Act, 1882 (Not for profit) or other statutes.

292 (b) Voluntary Organizations or Non-Government Organizations registered under the 
Societies Registration Act, Indian Trust Act carrying out activities which promote the 
objectives of the STEP programme, with adequate financial and other resources, credibility and 
experience of the type of activities to be undertaken. 
(c) Co-operative Societies. 

Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: 
http://wcd.nic.in/sites/default/files/Final%20STEP%20Guidelines%202016_0.pdf 

 

 
22.3 Name of Scheme: Ujjawala 
A Comprehensive Scheme for Prevention of Trafficking and Rescue, Rehabilitation and 
Re-integration of Victims of Trafficking for Commercial Sexual Exploitation 
The scheme has been conceived primarily for the purpose of preventing trafficking on the one 
hand and rescue and rehabilitation of victims on the other. 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2007 
Objectives: 
• To prevent trafficking of women and children for commercial sexual exploitation through 
social mobilization and involvement of local communities, awareness generation 
programmes, generate public discourse through workshops/seminars and such events and 
any other innovative activity. 
• To facilitate rescue of victims from the place of their exploitation and place them in safe 
custody. 
• To provide rehabilitation services both immediate and long-term to the victims by 
providing basic amenities/needs such as shelter, food, clothing, medical treatment 
including counselling, legal aid and guidance and vocational training. 
• To facilitate reintegration of the victims into the family and society at large. 
• To facilitate repatriation of cross -border victims to their country of origin.

293 Salient features : 

The Scheme shall have the following main components: - 1. Prevention 2. Rescue 3. 
Rehabilitation 4. Re-Integration 

The implementing agencies may seek assistance for one or more the components as mentioned 
under the scheme. While applying for a particular component(s), the implementing agencies 
should provide justification for selecting the specific components and the location of projects. 
The implementing agency has to bear 10% of the project cost. 

TARGET GROUP/BENEFICIARIES: 

• Women and children who are vulnerable to trafficking for commercial sexual 
exploitation. 
• Women and children who are victims of trafficking for commercial sexual exploitation. 

Funding Pattern : 

The funding pattern for the release of funds will be shared between the Central Govt., States and 
implementing agencies in ratio 60:30:10, except North Eastern and Himalayan States where the 
applicable sharing ratio shall be 80:10:10 respectively and in case of UT administrations the 
sharing ratio shall be 90:10 between the Central Government and implementing agency. 

 
Eligibility : 

The implementing organizations must fulfil the following eligibility conditions: 1. The agency 
should be registered under law and must have a properly constituted Managing Body with its 
powers, duties and responsibilities clearly defined and laid down in its Constitution; 2. The 
organization must not work for the profit of any individual or body of individuals; 3. It should 
ordinarily have three years experience after its registration; 4. Its financial position should be 
sound; 5. It should have facilities, resources, experience and personnel to initiate the scheme for 
which assistance is sought; 6. Voluntary organisations should be registered with the NGO PS 
portal of NITI Aayog. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: 
https://wcd.nic.in/sites/default/files/Ujjawala%20New%20Scheme.pdf

294 22.4 Name of Scheme: Nirbhaya Fund 

Violence and abuse against women and girls is frequent on streets, in public transportation and in 
other public places. Such occurrences restrict women‟s right to mobility, discouraging their 
freedom to walk freely and move in public spaces of their choice. Such violence also limits their 
access to essential services and adversely impact their health and wellbeing. 

In this context, and following the tragedy of December 2012, the Government has set up a 
dedicated fund – Nirbhaya Fund – which can be utilized for projects specifically designed to 
improve the safety and security of women. It is a non -lapsable corpus fund, being administered 
by Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance. 

As per the guidelines issued by Ministry of Finance dt 25.03.2015, the Ministry of Women and 
Child Development (MWCD) is the nodal Ministry to appraise/recommend proposals and 
schemes to be funded under Nirbhaya Fund. MWCD further has the responsibility to review and 
monitor the progress of sanctioned schemes in conjunction with the line Ministries/Departments. 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 

Year of Commencement: 2013 

Salient features : 

The proposed projects under the Nirbhaya Fund should have the following features: 

• Direct impact on safety and security concerns of women 
• Optimum use of existing infrastructure 
• Innovative use of technology 
• No duplication of existing government schemes/programmes 
• Provision for real time intervention as far as possible. E.g. in case of CCTVs for 
women‟s safety, there should be real -time monitoring of footage and quick response, 
rather than just a recording of events for evidence after the incident has occurred 
• Strict privacy and confidentiality of women‟s identity and information. E.g. 
placement of 
• CCTVs so as to not compromise women‟s privacy, protection of video data collected etc. 
• Defined role of all stakeholders 
• Clear definition of project: 

o Inputs – required manpower, physical assets, financial resources etc. 

o Activities – to be undertaken during the project cycle. E.g. trainings, 
building infrastructure etc.

295 o Outputs – product of the project. E.g. number of people reached, area covered etc. 

o Measurable outcomes – expected achievement of the project. E.g. increase in 
prosecutions of crime against women, reduction in crime rate etc. 

E.g. installation of 500 CCTVs at crime prone areas and public places is a project 
output. However, this offers no indication of whether the technology is actually used or 
if it improves police effectiveness. The outcome of such a project could be a reduction 
in incidents of crime, increasing use of CCTV footage as evidence in court, more 
prosecutions for crime against women etc. 

• No. of beneficiaries to be reached – absolute or estimated 
• Defined monitoring mechanism – from lowest level up to MWCD 
• Support of State WCD/Social Welfare Department, State Home Department and 
concerned central Ministry/Department (in case of proposals from States) 

PROCEDURE FOR SUBMITTING PROPOSALS 

• Central Government Ministries/Departments can formulate proposals and send to 
MWCD. 
• State Departments can also formulate proposals with regard to their specific sector 
(e.g. road transport, policing, power etc.) 

o States should submit proposals to the concerned Central Government 
Ministry/Department. 

o They should also mark an advance copy to the Secretary, MWCD (Chairperson of 
the Empowered Committee). 

o All proposals from UTs are to be routed through the Ministry of Home Affairs. 

o The concerned Ministry/Department of the Central Government should forward the 
State/UT proposals with their recommendations/comments to the Empowered 
Committee. 

• Autonomous and other govt. bodies can submit proposals through 
concerned Ministries/Departments/State Governments. 

PROCEDURE FOR PROCESSING PROPOSALS 

• The Empowered Committee is to appraise and take a view on the proposals.

296 • Following recommendation by the Empowered Committee, the concerned 
Ministry/ Department should place the proposal before the Competent Authority 
for approval subject to the following financial limits: 

o Up to Rs. 100 Cr: Secretary, Concerned Ministry 

o Rs. 100-500 Cr: Minister of Concerned Ministry 

o Rs. 500-1000 Cr: Minister of Concerned Ministry and MoF 

o Above Rs. 1000 Cr: Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) 

• After obtaining the necessary approvals and subject to the availability of funds, there 
will be two ways of releasing funds: 

o The concerned Ministry/Department should take up the proposal with Budget Division 
(DEA) Ministry of Finance under Nirbhaya Fund. 

o With approval of MoF, MWCD can also transfer funds to 
concerned Ministries/Departments for further disbursal to reduce time-lag of 
allocations through annual budgets. 
• The Budget Division (DEA), with the approval of Finance Minister will approve the 
funding of schemes from Nirbhaya Fund and will also be the nodal Ministry for any 
accretion into and withdrawal from the fund. 
• The concerned Ministries/Departments shall take necessary action for approval of 
SFC/ EFC /PIB and Cabinet for implementation of the scheme on the ground. 

Funding Pattern : 

The below standard funding pattern will be followed: 

• 60:40 for all States 
• 90:10 for States with difficult terrains 
• 100% for UTs 
• Few initiatives are 100% funded 

The funds for the projects shall be released following the procedure prescribed in GFR 2005. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: 
https://wcd.nic.in/sites/default/files/Approved%20framework%20for%20Nirbhaya%20Fund_0 
.pdf

297 22.5 Name of Scheme: Pradhan Mantri Matritva Vandana Yojana (PMMVY) 

The Pradhan Mantri Matritva Vandana Yojana (PMMVY) is a maternity benefit program run by 
the Government of India. It is a conditional cash transfer scheme for pregnant and lactating 
women of 19 years of age or above for first two live births. It provides partial wage 
compensation to women for wage -loss during childbirth and childcare and to provide conditions 
for safe delivery and good nutrition and feeding practices. 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2017 
Objectives of the scheme: 
• Providing partial compensation for the wage loss in terms of cash incentives so that the 
woman can take adequate rest before and after delivery of the first living child. 
• The cash incentive provided would lead to improved health seeking behaviour amongst 
the Pregnant Women and Lactating Mothers (PW&LM). 

 
Eligibility: 

• All Pregnant Women and Lactating Mothers, excluding PW&LM who are in regular 
employment with the Central Government or the State Governments or PSUs or those 
who are in receipt of similar benefits under any law for the time being in force. 
• All eligible Pregnant Women and Lactating Mothers who have their pregnancy on or 
after 01.01.2017 for first child in family. 
• The date and stage of pregnancy for a beneficiary would be counted with respect to her 
LMP date as mentioned in the MCP card. 
• Case of Miscarriage/Still Birth. 
• Case of Infant Mortality. 

Benefits under PMMVY: 

• Cash incentives in three instalments i.e. first instalment of ` 1000/ - on early registration 
of pregnancy at the Anganwadi Centre (AWC)/ approved Health facility as may be 
identified by the respective administering State/ UT, second instalment of ` 2000/ - after 
six months of pregnancy on receiving at least one ante -natal check -up (ANC) and third 
instalment of ` 2000/ - after child birth is registered and the child has received the first 
cycle of BCG, OPV, DPT and Hepatitis -B, or its equivalent/ substitute.

298 • The eligible beneficiaries would receive the incentive given under the Janani Suraksha 
Yojana (JSY) for Institutional delivery and the incentive received under JSY would be 
accounted towards maternity benefits so that on an average a woman gets ` 6000/ -. 

Funding Pattern: The Government of India funds would be based on the following cost sharing 
ratio between the Centre and the States/UTs: 
All States/UTs (with legislature) 60:40 
NER and Himalayan States 90:10 
Union Territories without legislature 100% funding by Central Government 

 
Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: 
https://wcd.nic.in/sites/default/files/PMMVY%20Scheme%20Implemetation%20Guidelines%2 
0._0.pdf 

 

 
22.6 Name of Scheme: General Grant -in-aid (GIA) Scheme for Assistance to Voluntary 
Organisations in the field of Women and Child Development 
The Ministry of Women and Child Development is implementing a Scheme called the General 
Grant -in-Aid Scheme, also called Scheme for innovative projects for women and children. 
Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 

Objectives of the scheme: 
The objective of the Scheme is to support innovative voluntary action and initiatives to render 
services for women and children. 
Salient features: 

This Scheme is meant to supplement the existing schemes of the Ministry and of the Central 
Social Welfare Board and not to duplicate them. Financial assistance is provided for services 
that are not covered by the structured schemes of the Ministry or CSWB. 
Projects falling under the following categories may be supported under the 
Scheme: -

299 a) Project that suggests a new approach to tackle a pressing social problem. 

b) Project which fills essential gaps in existing services and complements them so as to 
maximise the impact. 
c) Project to tackle a problem area which is relatively unserviced but where need is 
urgent. 
d) Project which provides integrated services, all the components need not be 
financially supported by one source. 
e) Project which is community based and renders non-institutional services. 

Where the nature of the problem so demands, institutional programmes will also be 
supported. 
Pilot projects in any of the above areas will also be supported. Financial assistance will be 
provided to establish the innovative project over the project cycle, and will not be extended on 
a continuing basis as a matter of course. 
Funding Pattern 

Financial assistance is given up to 90% of the approved cost on recurring and non -recurring 
expenditure and the balance of 10% is to be met by the voluntary agency or any other 
organisation, but preferable by the voluntary organisation itself. In the case of an organisation 
located in remote, backward and tribal areas, the Government may bear 95% of the approved 
cost. The extent of financial assistance is decided on merit on a case to case basis by the 
Project Sanctioning committee under the Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child 
Development. 
Eligibility: 
Voluntary organisations, with experience of at least 2 years, can apply through the State 
Govt/UT Admn. 
Area of Operation : All States and Union Territories 

 
For detail Information visit: http://wcd.nic.in/sites/default/files/cswb.pdf

300 22.7 Name of Scheme: Beti Bachao Beti Padhao (BBBP) 

Coordinated and convergent efforts are needed to ensure survival, protection and education of 
the girl child. In this background, Beti Bachao Beti Padhao (BBBP) Scheme was launched by the 
Hon‟ble Prime Minister on 22nd January, 2015 in Panipat, Haryana to address the issue of 
decline in CSR and related issues of empowerment of girls and women over a life cycle 
continnum. The scheme was initially launched in 100 districts in 2014 -15, and was expanded to 
61 additional districts in 2015 -16. Following initial success of the scheme, the initiative has been 
expanded to all 640 districts of the Country (as per Census 2011) through a nation -wide mass 
media campaign, and focussed intervention and multi -sectoral action in select districts. 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2015 
Objectives of the scheme: 
The Overall Goal of the Beti Bachao Beti Padhao (BBBP) Scheme is to celebrate the girl child 
and enable her education. The objectives of the Scheme are as under: 
i. To prevent gender biased sex selective elimination 
ii. To ensure survival and protection of the girl child 
iii. To ensure education and participation of the girl child 
Target group 

1. Primary : Young and newly married couples; Pregnant and Lactating mothers; parents 
2. Secondary : Youth, adolescents (girls and boys), in-laws, medical doctors/ practitioners, 
private hospitals, nursing homes and diagnostic centres 
3. Tertiary : Officials, PRIs; frontline workers, women SHGs/Collectives, religious leaders, 
voluntary organizations, media, medical associations, industry associations, general 
public as a whole . 

Strategies 

• Implement a sustained Social Mobilization and Communication Campaign to create equal 
value for the girl child & promote her education. 
• Place the issue of decline in CSR/SRB in public discourse, improvement of which would 
be a indicator for good governance. 
• Focus on Gender Critical Districts and Cities low on CSR for intensive & integrated 
action. 
• Adopt Innovative Interventions/Actions by the districts as per their local needs, context 
and sensibilities. 
• Mobilize & Train Panchayati Raj Institutions/Urban local bodies/ Grassroot workers as 
catalysts for social change, in partnership with local community/women‟s/youth groups.

301 • Engage with Communities to challenge gender stereotypes and social norms. 
• Ensure service delivery structures/schemes & programmes are sufficiently responsive to 
issues of gender and children‟s rights. 
• Enable Inter -sectoral and inter -institutional convergence at District/Block/Grassroot 
levels. 

Funding Pattern: 

Beti Bachao Beti Padhao(BBBP) scheme shall be operated/implemented under the Centrally 
Sponsored Umbrella Scheme namely, Mission for Protection and Empowerment for Women 
with 100% financial assistance for District Level component of the scheme. 

For detail Information visit: https://wcd.nic.in/sites/default/files/Guideline_5.pdf 

 

22.8 Name of Scheme: Swadhar Greh 

The scheme envisions a supportive institutional framework for women victims of difficult 
circumstances so that they could lead their life with dignity and conviction. It envisages that 
shelter, food, clothing, and health as well as economic and social security are assured for such 
women. It also envisions that the special needs of these women are properly taken care of and 
under no circumstances they should be left unattended or abandoned which could lead to their 
exploitation and desolation. 

Type of scheme: Central Sector Scheme 

Year of Commencement: 2015 

Objectives of the scheme: 
Under the Scheme , Swadhar Greh will be set up in every district with capacity of 30 women 
with the following objectives: a) To cater to the primary need of shelter, food, clothing, medical 
treatment and care of the women in distress and who are without any social and economic 
support. b) To enable them to regain their emotional strength that gets hampered due to their 
encounter with unfortunate circumstances. c) To provide them with legal aid and guidance to 
enable them to take steps for their readjustment in family/society. d) To rehabilitate them 
economically and emotionally. e) To act as a support system that understands and meets various 
requirements of women in distress. f) To enable them to start their life afresh with dignity and 
conviction. 
For big cities and other districts having more than 40 lakh population or those districts where 
there is a need for additional support to the women, more than one Swadhar Greh could be

302 established. The capacity of Swadhar Greh could be expanded up to 50 or 100 on the basis of 
need assessment and other important parameters. 

Salient features: 
The objectives cited above would be pursued adopting the following strategies: a) Temporary 
residential accommodation with the provision of food, clothing, medical facilities etc. b) 
Vocational and skill up gradation trainings for economic rehabilitation of such women c) 
Counseling, awareness generation and behavioral trainings d) Legal aid and Guidance e) 
Counseling through telephone. 
The benefit of the component could be availed by women above 18 years of age of the following 
categories: a) Women who are deserted and are without any social and economic support; b) 
Women survivors of natural disasters who have been rendered homeless and are without any 
social and economic support; c) Women prisoners released from jail and are without family, 
social and economic support; d) Women victims of domestic violence, family tension or discord, 
who are made to leave their homes without any means of subsistence and have no special 
protection from exploitation and/ or facing litigation on account of marital disputes; and e) 
Trafficked women/girls rescued or runaway from brothels or other places where they face 
exploitation and Women affected by HIV/AIDS who do not have any social or economic 
support. However such women/ girls should first seek assistance under UJJAWALA Scheme in 
areas where it is in operation. 
Components of the Scheme: a) Construction grant for construction of the building will be 
admissible to State Governments, Municipal Corporations, Cantonment Boards and Panchayati 
Raj Institutions only. Land for this purpose is to be provided by the implementing agency free of 
cost. b) Rent for Swadhar Greh, if run in a rented building. c) Assistance for recurring and non 
recurring expenditure for management of Swadhar Greh d) Provision for food, shelter, clothing, 
medical care, pocket expense for residents and children e) Provision of counseling, legal aid, 
vocational training and guidance.. 

Funding Pattern: 
This Scheme will be implemented as a Centrally Sponsored Scheme through States at 60:40 cost 
sharing ratio except in case of North Eastern State, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh and Jammu 
and Kashmir where the share of Centre and State will be in the ratio of 90:10. In the case of UTs, 
the Government will provide 100% assistance. 

Eligibility: Women above 18 years of age. 

Area of Operation : States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: 
https://wcd.nic.in/sites/default/files/Revised%20Guidelines%20Swadhar%20Greh%2C2015%2 
0%28%20English%29.pdf

303 Ministry of Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports 

 
23.1 Name of Scheme: National Service Scheme (NSS) 

The National Service Scheme (NSS) is a Central Sector Scheme of Government of India, 
Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports. It provides opportunity to the student youth of 11th & 12th 
Class of schools at +2 Board level and student youth of Technical Institution, Graduate & Post 
Graduate at colleges and University level of India to take part in various government led 
community service activities & programmes. The sole aim of the NSS is to provide hands on 
experience to young students in delivering community service. Since inception of the NSS in the 
year 1969, the number of students strength increased from 40,000 to over 3.8 million up to the 
end of March 2018 students in various universities, colleges and Institutions of higher learning 
have volunteered to take part in various community service programmes. 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 1969 
Objectives: 
NSS aims at developing the following qualities/ competencies among the volunteers: 

a) To understand the community in which the NSS volunteers work and to understand themselves in 
relation to their community; 

b) To identify the needs and problems of the community and involve themselves in problem -solving 
exercise; 

c) To develop among themselves a sense of social and civic responsibility; 

d) To utilize their knowledge in finding practical solutions to individual and community problems; 

e) To gain skills in mobilizing community participation; 

f) To acquire leadership qualities and democratic values; 

g) To develop capacity to meet emergencies and natural disasters; and 

h) To practice national integration and social harmony. 

NSS attempts to establish meaningful linkages between „Campus and Community‟, „College and 
Village‟ and „Knowledge and Action‟.

304 Major Activities: 

National Integration Camp (NIC): 

The National Integration Camp (NIC) is organized every year and the duration of each camp is of 
7 days with day -night boarding & lodging. These camps are held in different parts of the country. 
Each camp involves 200 NSS volunteers to undertake the scheduled activities. 

Objectives of the National Integration Camp 

Make the NSS volunteers aware of the following: 

• Rich cultural diversity of India 

• History of our diversified culture 

• National pride through knowledge about India 

• To integrate the nation through social service 

Adventure Program: 

The camps are held every year which are attended by approximately 1500 NSS volunteers with at 
least 50% of the volunteers being girl students. These camps are conducted in Himalayan Region 
in the North and Arunachal Pradesh in North East region. The adventure activities undertaken in 
these camps includes trekking of mountains, water rafting, Para-sailing and basic skiing. 

Objectives of Adventure Program 

• Promote various adventure activities among NSS volunteers 

• Infuse the sense of love towards the various regions of India 

• Enhance leadership qualities, fraternity, team spirit and risk taking capacity. 

• Improvement of physical and mental strength 

• Exposure to new vocational possibilities 

NSS Republic Day Parade Camp : 

The first Republic Day Camp of NSS Volunteers was held in 1988. The camp takes place in 
Delhi between 1st and 31st January every year with 200 NSS selected volunteers who are good in 
discipline, March -past and cultural activities. A Contingent of selected NSS volunteers

305 participates in the Republic Day Parade at Rajpath, New Delhi on 26th of January every year in 
accordance with the guidelines and requisition of the Ministry of Defence. 

Objectives of NSS Republic Day Parade Camp 

• Enable the volunteers to interact with fellow members hailing from various parts of India. 

• Experience the tradition, custom, culture, language of all states of India. 

• Provide a chance to develop overall personality of the Student volunteers. 

• Constitute the bond of patriotism, national integration, brotherhood and communal 
harmony. 

National Youth Festivals 

National Youth Festivals are organized every year from 12th to 16th January by the Government 
of India, Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports in collaboration with the State Governments in 
different parts of the country. Eminent guests, speakers and youth icons are invited to address and 
interact with about 1500 participating NSS volunteers during the National Youth Festivals. 

Objectives of National Youth Festivals 

• Make the volunteers aware of the various festivals celebrated in the country 

• Remind the volunteers of the cultural importance of festivals celebrated in our country 

• Provide a chance to the NSS volunteers to interact with the resource person/speaker/youth 
icons 

National Service Scheme Award 

The Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, Government of India had instituted the National 
Service Scheme Awards to recognize the voluntary service rendered by NSS volunteers, 
Programme Officers, N.S.S. units and the university/senior secondary council. 
Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: https://nss.gov.in/nss -detail -page

306 23.2 Name of Scheme: National Youth Development Fund 

The National Youth Development Fund (NYDF) was established in July 2015 under Charitable 
Endowments Act, 1890 with the aim of promoting Development of Youth in the country. 
Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2015 
Objectives: 
• To administer and apply the moneys of the Fund for all round development and 
empowerment of youth, in accordance with the objectives of the National Youth Policy; 
• To take up programmes for engaging the youth in community service and various nation - 
building activities; 
• To construct and maintain infrastructure as may be required, for the development and 
empowerment of youth; 
• To provide tools and equipment, as may be required, for the development and 
empowerment of youth; 
• To identify problems of different youth target groups and take up research and 
development studies for addressing the same; 
• To promote international perspective among the youth through youth exchange 
programmes and other necessary steps; and 
• To take up other activities for youth development, as may be necessary or incidental to 
the objects mentioned above. 
Salient features : 

The primary function of the Fund is all round development and empowerment of the youth in 
general and individual youth in particular for achieving excellence at the National and 
International level; this enables the Fund to assist youth for their specific requirements; the other 
areas of assistance include development and maintenance of infrastructure and supply of tools 
and equipment for the development and empowerment of youth. 

Funding Pattern : 

The application in prescribed format for financial assistance from or under the Fund from eligible 
organisations shall be submitted addressing the Member Secretary of the Fund. After scrutiny of 
the all the project proposals received from Government/Non -Government 
Organization/Individual, the Member - Secretary shall place the proposals in the meeting of the 
Executive Committee. All the proposals for financial assistance from the Fund shall be 
considered and disposed of by the Committee and the Council shall be informed of such

307 decisions. The Committee may also refer any application before consideration, to the Council or 
any other body (if it thinks it is necessary to do so) for expressing its views. 

After approval of the proposal/application from the Government/Non - Government Organization, 
the NYDF will release assistance in instalments - normally 75% of the approved amount as 
advance and the balance amount on completion of the project. In exceptional cases, advance 
up to 90% can be released. The balance amount (25% or 10%) will be released on submission of 
the following documents: 

Performance Report of the project with supporting photographs. Statement of accounts with 
supporting documents like bills, vouchers and receipts. Details of the resources/facilities 
available at the Institute/place of projects. 

In case of assistance to Individual, the quantum of release will be decided by the Executive 
Committee. 

In case the Non-Governmental Organisation do not comply with the terms and conditions 
imposed by the Central Government while sanctioning the grant, action shall be taken against 
them in accordance with law. 

In case of individuals applying for research work, his/her proposal should be anchored in 
reputed institutes/center of excellence. 

In case of individuals applying for representation at international level, financial assistance upto 
50 % of travel expenses will be considered. 

In case of recognition/Financial Assistance to Individuals in the field of Adventure, the matter 
will be decided by the Executive Committee according to the merit of the case. 

Ordinarily, assistance to Individual will be Rs. 2,00,000/ - and with a maximum ceiling of Rs. 
5,00,000/ - as decided by the Executive Committee. 

In case of Organisation, maximum assistance per project will be decided by the Executive 
Committee. The limit would be different for different projects. Within the limit, rates for various 
components like boarding/lodging will be decided by the Executive Committee. Such rates 
could be different for different geographical regions. The assistance will be provided only for 
conducting specific programmes and will not cover events like organizing workshops, 
conferences and seminars. 

Financial Assistance under the Fund will be given only once. 

Eligibility :

308 All Government/Non -Governmental Organization/Individual, registered as a Society or Public 
Trust or under any other legislation (except for Individual), having a track record of undertaking 
youth development activities for at least three years shall be eligible for applying for financial 
assistance from the Fund. 

Individuals with disability and women will be given special consideration. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: https://yas.nic.in/sites/default/files/NYDF%20Guideline.pdf 

 

 
23.3 Name of Scheme: National Programme for Youth and Adolescent Development 

The scheme titled National Programme for Youth Adolescent Development (NPYAD) has been 
formulated by merger of four 100% central sector grants -in-aid schemes of the Ministry of Youth 
Affairs & Sports during 10th Plan namely, Promotion of Youth Activities & Training, Promotion 
of National Integration, Promotion of Adventure and Development and Empowerment of 
Adolescents, with a view to reduce multiplicity of schemes with similar objectives, ensuring 
uniformity in funding pattern and implementation mechanism, avoiding delays in availability of 
funds to the field level and institutionalising participation of State Governments in project 
formulation and its implementation. While there will be synergy and convergence in operational 
mechanism and programme delivery, there will be clear distinction with regards the financial 
parameters of each of the components under the scheme. 

Type of scheme : Central Sector Scheme 
Year of Commencement: 2000 -01 
Objectives: 
Short term objectives: - Provide opportunity for holistic development of youth including 
adolescents for realisation of their fullest potential; - Develop leadership qualities and personality 
development of youth and to channelise their energy towards socio -economic development and 
growth of the nation; - Promote national integration, strengthen secular and eclectic outlook 
through creative expressions by youth; - Foster the spirit of adventure, risk taking, teamwork, the 
capacity of ready and vital response to challenging situations and of endurance among youth; - 
Acknowledge adolescents as a distinct sub -group among youth and address their distinct needs 
and at the same time provide positive stimulation and congenial environment for their all -round 
development; and - To encourage research and publication and to promote technical resource

309 support including development of information and database on issues concerning youth and 
adolescents. 

Long -term objectives: - Engage and channelise the energy of youth in a positive manner for 
nation building; - Develop amongst youth a sense of pride in nationally accepted values like 
democracy, socialism, and secularism; - Promote activities and programmes, which foster social 
harmony and national unity among youth; - Promote spirit of national integration, unity in 
diversity, pride in Indianness among the youth of different parts of the country and to induce a 
sense of social harmony amongst the youth; To motivate the youth to act as focal point for 
dissemination of knowledge in the rural area and involve them in nation building process; - To 
stimulate action for development and empowerment of adolescents, particularly from the 
economically and socially neglected/backward sections of society; - To build and develop an 
environment which recognises the specific needs and promise of the adolescents in the country 
and provides for adolescent friendly services. 

Salient features : 

Programme Component: - The umbrella scheme will comprise of the following broad 
programme areas and their components: - 

Sl. 
No Name of the Programme Area Programme Component 
(a) Youth Leadership and Personality 
Development i. Youth Leadership and Personality 
Development Training 
(b) Promotion of National Integration i. National Integration Camp 
ii. Inter -State Youth Exchange 
Programme 
iii Multi -Cultural Activities 
iv. National Youth Festival 
v. State Youth Festival 
vi. National Youth Awards 
(c) Promotion of Adventure i. Promotion of adventure at basic and 
intermediate level in India 
ii. Promotion of adventure at advance 
level including expeditions in India 
iii. Grants to Recognised Institutions iv 
Tenzing Norgey National Adventure 
Awards

310 (d) Development and Empowerment of 
Adolescents i. Life Skills Education 
ii. Counselling 
iii. Career Guidance 
iv. Residential Camps 
(e) Technical and Resource Development i. Environment Building 
ii. Research & Studies on youth issues 
iii Documentation & Publication 
iv Seminars, Conferences, Exhibitions 
and Workshops on youth or adolescent 
issues, national integration and 
adventure 

 

Beneficiaries: The targeted beneficiaries of the programmes include members of the youth clubs 
affiliated to the Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan, National Service Scheme, State Government 
Youth Organisations, Bharat Scouts & Guides or student youth in Schools, Colleges and 
Universities. Adolescents and Youth from other established youth organisations or NGOs may be 
considered provided they are the registered members of such organisations. Preference may be 
given to the youth with special abilities and youth belonging to scheduled caste, scheduled tribes, 
minorities and weaker sections. In selection of beneficiary women will have a distinct priority 
and care should be taken to include at least one-third beneficiaries from women. 

Eligibility: 

The following organizations are eligible for financial assistance under the scheme: 

(a) All the autonomous organizations whether partially or fully funded by the Government, 
registered Societies, Trusts, NGOs registered under the relevant Acts, for the last five years and 
actively working in the field of Youth Development for the last three years. 

(b) Universities including deemed universities and Association of Indian Universities. 
(c)State Level Organisations (SLOs) i.e. 
(i) State Departments/Directorates for Youth Affairs/Youth Welfare and other District Level 
Offices in States; 

(ii) Panchayati Raj Institutions and Urban Local Bodies; 
(iii)Educational Institutions including Polytechnics. 
(d) The organization must have, on an average, an annual turn over of Rs. 5.0 lakhs for the last 
three years duly authenticated by a Chartered Accountant

311 (e) The organization must have an active website and web address 

(f) All the applications for grants under the Scheme must be received electronically on -line 
within the stipulated time limit. 

(g) The organizations seeking grants must also be prepared to make a presentation before the 
designated authority whenever asked to do the same and failure to do so may debar them from 
receiving any future grants from the Government. 

(h) The organizations seeking grants must be able to complete the programme and submit 
theUtilization Certificate(UC) within the financial year in which the grant is being sanctioned. 

(i) The organizations seeking grants will clearly indicate the schedule of the programme and 
organizations who have been sanctioned grants by the Ministry will duly inform the Ministry 
about the commencement of the programme, one week prior to the commencement of the 
programme. The organization will also facilitate the inspection of the programme by an officer 
of the Ministry or any other person authorized by the Ministry. The organization must ensure 
that the inspection takes place during the currency of the programme. Inspection conducted after 
completion of the programme will not be recognized by the Ministry. 

(j) The PAC while deciding the G -I-A shall also decide whether the grant will be given in lump - 
sum or in installment and in the later case the proportion to be given in the installment will also 
be decided by the PAC. 

(k) The grants -in-aid whether given in installment or lump -sum shall be settled within the 
financial year in which it is released. 

(l) All the grantees shall follow the provisions contained in Government of India‟s General 
Financial Rules, 2005, wherever applicable. 
Funding Pattern : The financial assistance from the government of India under the scheme will 
be catalytic funding and the PIA is free to mobilise additional resource from other collaborating 
agencies/ organizations for conduct of the programme. The amount financial assistance may 
vary depending on the no of participants or the duration of any individual programme 
drawn, which may be different than the number of participants or number of days 
mentioned below against the each typical programme component. The pattern of financial 
assistance for a typical programme component under the scheme and the eligible organisations/ 
institutions for the financial assistance are given below for guidance. 

 
Sl.No. Typical Programme Component Financial assistance 
amount under the 
Scheme Eligible grantee for 
the Prog. 
Component

312 (a) Youth Leadership and Personality Development 
(i) Youth Leadership and Personality 
Development Training Project Rs. 3,00,000/ - AIOs/SLOs 
(b) Promotion of National Integration 
(i) National Integration Camp for 
150 persons for 7 days duration at 
• State Capitals 
• Other Places 

Rs. 4,30,000/ - 
Rs. 3,53,750/ - AIOs/SLOs 
(ii) Inter -State Youth Exchange 
Programme for 50 participants for 
15 days durations Rs. 2,92,500/ - AIOs/SLOs 
(iii) Multi -Cultural Activities Maximum Rs. 3.0 
lakh for first time 
grantee AIOs/SLOs 
(iv) National Youth Festival Maximum up to Rs. 
2.00 crore State Govts./ UT 
Admn. 
(v) State Youth Festival Up to Rs.10,00,000/ - State Govts./ UT 
Admn. 
(vi) National Youth Awards 
- Individuals 
- NGO 
Rs. 20,000/ - 
Rs. 1,00,000/ - Individuals and 
NGOs 
(c) Promotion of Adventure 
(i) Grants to Recognised Institutions As per approved 
Annual Budget Recognised 
Institutions 
(ii) One-week adventure camp at basic 
and intermediate level for 25 persons Rs. 93,750/ - AIOs/SLOs 
(iii) Promotion of adventure at advance 
level including expeditions in India As per specific 
expedition Recognised 
Institutions 
(iv) Tenzing Norgey National Adventure 
Awards Rs.3,00,000/ - Individuals 
(d) Development of Adolescents 
(i) Life Skills Education (for 40 teens) 
• One-week Residential Prog. 
• One-week Non-residential 
Prog. 
Rs. 65,000/ - 
Rs. 23,000/ - AIOs/SLOs 
(ii) Counselling 
• Out-reach Prog. 
• Rural Counselling Centre 
• Telephone help line 
Rs. 1,73,000/ - 
Rs. 1,28,000/ - 
Rs. 1,00,000/ - AIOs/SLOs 
(iii) Career guidance 
• Career Guidance Centre 
First year 
Second/Subsequent year 
• Career Mela 

Rs. 2,34,000/ - 
Rs. 2,14,000/ - 
Rs. 25,000/ - AIOs/SLOs

313 (iv) Second Chance Camps (4 months) Rs. 4,56,000/ - AIOs/SLOs 
(e) Technical Resource Development 
(i) Environment Building Maximum Rs. 2.0 
lakh AIOs/SLOs 
(ii) Research & Studies on youth issues Maximum Rs. 3.0 
lakh for first time 
grantee AIOs/SLOs 
(iii) 
Documentation & Publication Maximum Rs. 3.0 
lakh for first time 
grantee AIOs/SLOs 
(iv) Seminars, Conferences and 
Workshops on youth or adolescent 
issues including national integration 
and adventure. 
• National level 
• State Level 
• Regional/District Level 

Maximum 
Rs. 5.0 lakh 
Rs. 3.0 lakh 
Rs. 0.50 lakh AIOs/SLOs 

The maximum ceiling for grants -in-aid to a PIA will be limited to Rs. 10.0 lakh for a district or 
the average programme expenditure of the PIA during last 3 years, whichever is less. The Project 
Appraisal Committee may in case of AIOs and State Government Organisations with reasons to 
be recorded in writing, recommend project for more than Rs. 10.0 lakh for a district. 

Area of Operation: All States and Union Territories 

For detail Information visit: https://nyks.nic.in/schemes/NPYAD -Guidelines.pdf